  After years of deadlock and recrimination over Brexit, Britain is heading for another general election on December 12th to try to settle the matter. It will be the country’s third election in less than five years. Boris Johnson, the prime minister, will be hoping to improve upon the disastrous performance of his predecessor, Theresa May, whose snap election in 2017 backfired. Her Conservative Party threw away a 17-seat majority, and had to govern with the support of Northern Ireland’s Democratic Unionist Party. That has blocked the government’s ability either to pass a Brexit deal or leave the EU without a deal.  The election is particularly hard to predict, for two reasons. First, Britain’s electoral landscape has changed markedly. The country has become polarised into Leave and Remain camps. At the same time, the old two-party system has fragmented, as the strongly pro-Remain Liberal Democrats and the avidly pro-Leave Brexit Party challenge Labour and the Tories. Scottish and Welsh nationalists have also drawn support from the big parties. A second factor is that, under the first-past-the-post electoral system, in which seats are allocated to candidates who win a plurality of votes in their constituencies, voters are increasingly likely to vote tactically—switching parties to maximise support for the strongest Leave or Remain candidates. Different parts of the country have swung in wildly different directions. At the last election, in 2017, the Tories gained ground in Leave-backing places, while slipping in Remainer areas. So the old technique of applying a national poll to each seat no longer works. To gain insight into voters’ intentions, The Economist will look at five marginal constituencies, commissioning a separate opinion poll in each in successive weeks. Such constituency surveys have a higher margin of error than national ones. But in this most unpredictable of contests they provide a guide to how different types of seat might play out.   Although this has been described as the Brexit election, that is far from the only subject on voters’ minds. In particular, they are also concerned about the ailing National Health Service and rising levels of some types of violent crime. The Tories are doing their best to persuade voters than they are the true “party of the NHS”, a title normally claimed by Labour. Meanwhile Labour is trying to capture Conservative turf in the field of law-and-order, where it claims the Tories’ spending cuts have damaged the police. Many other topics, from the economy to climate change, will sway different voters.  