“IT WAS as if the floodgates had opened”, says Mariusz Zabrocki, general manager for Kapten in London. When the French ride-hailing app invited drivers to register at two hotels in the capital in May, so many people turned up that the hotels kicked the firm out and Kapten had to decamp to a community centre in Vauxhall, near the River Thames. Customers, too, followed in their droves. In the second week of operating Kapten booked more rides in London than it did over the same period in all of France. Uber, the American pioneer of ride-hailing, is taking the threat from Kapten and other rivals extremely seriously. It has just lost its London licence after a surprise ruling from London’s transport watchdog. On November 25th Transport for London (TfL) decided Uber was not sufficiently “fit and proper” to have the permit renewed.  The problem is passenger safety, a familiar issue that caused Uber to lose its operating licence in September 2017 until, on appeal, a court gave it a probationary licence in June the following year for another 15 months (it then won a short extension). It was Uber itself that told TfL in May that a change to its systems had erroneously allowed unauthorised drivers to upload their photos to other drivers’ accounts. Some 14,000 rides (a relatively small number since Uber sells millions of rides in London each week) were provided by 43 such chauffeurs. One of them had in the past received a caution for distributing indecent images of children. No attacks on any passengers were recorded as a result of the error. Uber has since fixed the problem but TfL said it could not trust its processes in future. Dara Khosrowshahi, its chief executive, called the regulator’s action “just wrong”. The company now has 21 days to appeal against the withdrawal of the licence, and then a court will decide. Other British cities, too, have said they are studying TfL’s decision and may follow suit. In the meantime Uber can continue operating. Its popularity with millions of users in the capital makes it highly unlikely that TfL will ban it permanently. Yet the firm faces weeks of uncertainty. In that time, its rivals will be flaunting their wares. Several new services have recently entered the British market. None lacks commercial aggression. This week Ola, an Indian firm, pounced on Uber’s troubles to announce its arrival in London “in the coming weeks”. The service already operates in other British cities. The day after the news from TfL, traffic on Kapten’s app increased threefold, boasts Mr Zabrocki. Londoners will soon be able to pick from no fewer than five apps, some offering lower prices than Uber and leaving a higher portion of revenue for drivers. In addition to Uber, Kapten and Ola there is Bolt, an Estonian company, and ViaVan, which sells only shared rides (emphasising its green credentials). Market share is hard to ascertain. There is no single verified source of figures, and none of the firms releases comprehensive numbers of paid rides. Drivers often work for more than one app, making comparisons largely meaningless. All the services have a few tens of thousands of drivers or thereabouts. As for customers, Uber is well ahead, with 3.5m users. In second place is Kapten, which claims 800,000 customers. Bolt, which first arrived in 2017, says it has 300,000 users. ViaVan, another recent entrant, claims to have more than 500,000 customers. All the firms have strong backers with deep pockets and can be expected to burn cash to build market share for several years. Kapten and ViaVan are both backed by big German car groups. Bolt has raised money from Didi Chuxing, a Chinese ride-hailing giant. A Japanese group, SoftBank, stands behind Ola, Uber and Didi Chuxing and plans to fuel their expansion. London thus underlines just how low the barriers to entry are in ride-hailing, with the exception of one high one—a licence. Uber’s only real weapon to fight off its rivals in London (in a market that contributes a substantial share of its revenue and profit) is its well-established brand. The action by TfL will not have burnished it. A second lesson is that regulators are ready to contain the recent explosion of ride-hailing cars, e-scooters and electric bikes. To comply with new rules in New York aimed at reducing traffic congestion, Uber in September started limiting drivers’ access to its app. Last year Vienna seized hundreds of hirable bikes that city authorities said were cluttering public spaces. Transport authorities want to show that they are in control as cities move towards integrated “mobility-as-a-service” systems, says Richard Threlfall, global head of infrastructure at KPMG, an audit and consulting firm. As they do so, regulators appear to be listening to vested interests. TfL, for its part, comes under pressure from the Licensed Taxi Drivers’ Association (LTDA) to rein in Uber and other ride-hailing firms. The LTDA represents London’s pricey black cabs that serve mainly the well-to-do in the capital’s centre. Ride-hailing firms believe that TfL prefers black cabs, whose owners are overwhelmingly white and British. Only LTDA members are exempt from paying London’s £11.50 ($14.80) daily congestion charge. Uber’s ride-hailing rivals are bullish in public about the American firm’s regulatory difficulties in London, but in private they worry, too. As the boss of one puts it: “It could happen to you.”