ECONOMIC EXPANSIONS are most often killed off by rising interest rates or financial crashes—surprises that cause economy-wide demand for goods and services to fall. Rarer is the supply-side recession in which economies are deprived of their productive capacity. Not since the oil-price shocks of the 1970s has there been a global downturn that can be attributed primarily to supply. Yet if a worldwide slump happens in 2020 it may fall into that category—because it will have been caused primarily by the trade barriers erected between China and America. The trade war between the two countries intensified for most of 2019, when it had been expected to come to an end. Relations eased a little in October 2019, with the postponement of some tariffs, but an end to hostilities is some way off. It remains possible that the average tariff on American imports could start the new year at 6%, easily the highest this century. Moreover, tariffs are expanding to cover imports for which there are fewer ready substitutes. Firms and their supply chains are being forced to make disruptive adjustments which will eventually bubble up and spill over into the broader economy.  History offers little guidance as to what a trade-war recession looks like, or what the right policy response is. Nor, it seems, is economic theory much use. It predicts that tariffs, like all supply-side disruptions, will be inflationary. In fact the most visible effects of the trade war to date have been declining business confidence, a global manufacturing slump and tepid investment. Inflation expectations have been falling, as have long-term interest rates. That makes the slowdown look more normal. An upside of this is that the right policy response becomes clearer: economies will need stimulus. America’s Federal Reserve has already cut interest rates and the European Central Bank (ECB) has restarted quantitative easing (QE), while Chinese policymakers have eased both monetary and fiscal policy. Yet rich-world central banks are running up against limits on monetary policy. Interest rates in Europe are already negative and the ECB cannot buy bonds for ever without hitting legal constraints. The Fed does not have much more room to cut rates. The only central banks that look free to support their economies are those in emerging markets, where rates are higher and looser Fed policy is a boon, because it removes downward pressure on their currencies. Turnover among top global officials is a further source of uncertainty. Christine Lagarde is taking over at the ECB. Though she shares the doveishness of her predecessor, Mario Draghi, she will struggle to hold together the central bank’s governing council as its northern members become ever more agitated by negative rates and bond-buying. Britain is due a new Bank of England governor to replace Mark Carney. Kristalina Georgieva, a senior World Bank official, has replaced Ms Lagarde at the helm of the IMF. And America’s presidential election will have profound implications for both the trade war and economic policy. If Donald Trump is re-elected, investors might anticipate an assault on the Fed’s independence which includes replacing Jerome Powell, its head, with a more pliant figure when his term expires in 2022. A Democrat in the White House, by contrast, might reverse Mr Trump’s tax cuts and mount an assault on the rich. Either way, American monetary policy will enter a period of flux. In 2020 the Fed will finish a review of its monetary-policy framework. It will probably commit to targeting 2% inflation on average over the economic cycle as a whole, rather than all the time. Tolerating inflation overshoots after a downturn should allow it to fight a slump more aggressively. The Fed must also grapple with the consequences of having unwound QE in recent years. By making central-bank money scarce this has recently caused trouble in overnight money markets. The Fed will expand its balance-sheet again to ease the cash shortage and ensure the transmission of its monetary policy through the financial system. A scary scenarioA recession is not inevitable. In many countries, especially America, healthy labour markets and confident consumers are bulwarks against one. Yet these defences are beginning to show cracks. And there is a worst-case scenario that should worry central bankers everywhere: that the trade war turns inflationary after all, perhaps compounded by rising oil prices, even as growth slows. The world economy is teetering on the brink of an unfamiliar type of downturn, with central banks in a period of flux. It is an uncomfortable position to be in. This article appears in “The World in 2020”, our annual edition that looks at the year ahead. See more at worldin.economist.com.