WHEN THE “silent majority” found its voice, it did not use it as the authorities hoped. The Hong Kong government of Carrie Lam, the chief executive, had hoped that a populace cowed into silence by six months of increasingly violent unrest would use local elections on November 24th to show their exasperation with anti-government protesters. Instead, they delivered a stunning victory to campaigners for democracy, who support the demonstrators’ aims. The polls were held to pick about 450 representatives to district councils, rather feeble bodies that deal with local services. Normally pro-democracy politicians pay little attention to such elections. This time they wanted to turn them into a referendum on the protests. The result was a record turnout, and a near-total sweep of the seats.  It was evidence that despite the chaos, transport disruption and economic pain they have caused, the protesters retain strong support. Correspondingly, distrust of the local government and its backers in Beijing is widespread. After casting her own ballot, the city’s Mrs Lam dismissed the idea that this was a confidence vote. Few would agree. Pro-democracy platforms took control of 17 of the 18 councils, none of which they had previously won. No longer do pro-government parties dominate local-level politics. Hong Kong’s complicated electoral system means this also has an impact at other levels. Six of the 70 seats in the Legislative Council (Legco) are reserved for district councillors. In the most recent general election, in 2016, half of them went to pro-establishment parties; in the next, in 2020, the pro-democracy camp is likely to do better. District councillors also hold around 10% of 1,200 seats on the election committee that picks the chief executive, and is mostly stacked with those ready to back the government’s favoured candidate. The turnout was unprecedented. Nearly 3m voters—71.2% of those registered—participated. At the last district-level election, in November 2015, 47% of the 3.1m people eligible to vote did so. Overall, pro-government candidates still won some 40% of the popular vote. This year 386,000 new voters had registered and for the first time every seat was being contested (in 2015 15% were not). Fears that the vote might be disrupted brought voters out even before polls opened at 7.30am. Some queued for over an hour to cast their ballot. By the time the voting ended at 10.30pm the turnout in some middle-class constituencies had tipped over 80%. The election was held peacefully, in glorious autumn sunshine in a city which felt more at ease than it had for weeks. The polarisation and violence of the past few months were reduced to enthusiastic banner-waving and slogan-shouting—from both camps, side by side, on the streets. Just a week ago, amid some of the worst violence of the protests, such scenes were unimaginable. The governments in both Hong Kong and Beijing had suggested that the polls could go ahead only if there was no violence. In the event, the police stationed at every polling station were thankfully underemployed. District councils advise the government on a wide range of issues, especially matters relating to public services such as managing traffic lights, parks, libraries and rubbish collection. Elections to them are freely contested, without the Byzantine arrangements that skew the outcomes of Legco elections in favour of pro-government candidates. Each council is composed of directly elected members voted for by local residents as well as a small number of appointees from other political bodies. Control of a council allows its chairman to set its agenda and decisions. In most constituencies electors faced a choice between “yellow”, or pro-democracy, candidates, and “blue” ones sympathetic to the Communist Party in Beijing. Many blue candidates ran on a platform of ending the chaos and violence. Of the pro-democracy candidates, some had no political experience and almost no funding. A few had almost no manifesto, stating their platform simply to be the fulfilment of the “five demands” of the protesters, which include an independent investigation into the police handing of the protests and direct elections for both the chief executive and the Legco. Some of the blue side’s best-known names lost seats. The largest and best-funded pro-establishment party, the Democratic Alliance for the Betterment and Progress of Hong Kong (DAB), fielded 181 candidates but won just 21 seats. Thirteen pro-government legislative councillors, who can also hold positions on district councils, stood for election. Nine of them were defeated, including Holden Chow and Horace Cheung, both vice-chairmen of the DAB. Mr Cheung is also a member of Mrs Lam’s cabinet, known as the Executive Council. Starry Lee, the chairwoman of the DAB, did hold on to her seat but promptly offered to resign, an offer she said was rejected by the party’s central committee. In Tuen Mun, a suburb close to the border with mainland China, Junius Ho, a pro-establishment lawyer and Legco member who is detested by protesters, lost to Lo Chun-yu, a member of the Democratic Party, one of the oldest and biggest of the opposition groups. After the result Mr Ho described the result as having turned “heaven and earth upside down”. After the results, Mrs Lam promised to “strengthen co-operation” with the district councils and promised that the government would reflect on its shortcomings. Many people will expect her to do more than that—at a minimum, by reshuffling her advisory boards, including the Executive Council, to include voices from outside the establishment, and by launching an independent inquiry into the police’s handling of the protests. These results are likely to make it more difficult for Mrs Lam to justify intransigence. The government’s reluctance to clear the university campus where a number of protesters have been hiding for over a week suggests that it may already be considering a less forceful approach. Leaders in Beijing must be mulling how to respond. It will be harder to turn these results to the Communist Party’s own propaganda ends than it was to blame the protests on “black hands” and “terrorists”. The results may prompt some members of the pro-establishment camp to put pressure on Mrs Lam to stand down. But it is not clear that any possible successor would have more credibility. The pro-democracy camp, too, will be under pressure, to take the job of running its districts seriously and show that its candidates deserve their new positions. These elections prove that Hong Kongers are enthusiastic about democracy. Yet, as things stand, they will have the chance to vote next year for only half the seats in Legco and in 2022 will be excluded completely from the next scheduled election for the post of chief executive—the only people allowed to vote in that will be members of a committee stacked with pro-establishment figures. Many of those who have risked their safety and their futures to take to the streets might find that intolerable.