THE SOVIET UNION’S ideologues argued that a new human archetype would emerge under communism. The “new Soviet man”, they said, was strong, self-sacrificing and fanatical about spreading the socialist revolution. Alexander Zinoviev—whose noisy criticism of the USSR got him expelled in 1978—agreed that the regime was moulding people’s personalities. He painted “Homo Sovieticus” as a flag-waving, double-thinking dolt, unwilling to take his fate into his own hands. Determined as they were to be “engineers of the human soul” (a phrase used by Josef Stalin), Soviet leaders were opposed to anything they saw as a corrupting influence, and the government banned much Western music and art. Yet bootlegged and black-market copies found their way in; young people, desperate for a glimpse of life outside the USSR, shared records and magazines. Those near the union’s borders, in the Baltic states, for example, illicitly tuned in to foreign radio stations. By the late 1960s the “flower power” movement was in full swing in America, and the artists that provided the soundtrack to the “Summer of Love”—particularly the Beatles and Jimi Hendrix—had a committed, underground following behind the Iron Curtain.  The counterculture such material inspired, which ran for much longer than its counterpart in the West, is the subject of “Soviet Hippies”, an Estonian documentary which was shown in Britain for the first time last month. The film includes interviews with veterans of the Soviet Hippy movement who, now old and grey, are filmed wearing the tattered tie dye of their youth. Most, at least initially, had little interest in the rejection of consumerism embraced by hippies in the West: more than anything, they wanted to be individuals in a society where conformity was enforced. Tailors were not permitted to make trousers wider than 30 centimetres, so bell-bottom flares, often made from curtains, became a symbol of protest. Many paid dearly for their disobedience. One teenager was sent to a psychiatric hospital after his mother complained that he was listening to “Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band” on repeat. There he was subjected to “insulin shock therapy”: ie, injected with insulin to trigger comas and convulsions which were thought, wrongly, to jolt patients out of mental illnesses. Others had their long hair cut by force or were harassed by other citizens. The number of Soviet hippies probably never exceeded a few thousand people. Still, the extent to which the state viewed them as a threat became clear in June 1971, when bohemian Muscovites gathered outside the American embassy to protest against the Vietnam war. (Most participants’ motivation, one interviewee explains, was just to get together. The war itself was a convenient excuse, both because it was the focal point for the American hippy movement and because it was hoped that the government would not object.) The KGB promptly detained the protesters, some of whom were then incarcerated or drafted into the army. The remaining hippies hit the road. Many had spent summers hitchhiking to visit friends in other parts of the union and this practice solidified into a network known as Sistema (“the system”). The addresses of known hippies were collected in notebooks, meaning that a traveller could always find a kindred spirit when they arrived in town. Sistema members would meet for festivals and illegal “summer camps”. As hippies drew deeper underground, they moved further away from the American counterculture that had once inspired it. “The Western hippie movement was quickly eaten by social change and other movements—hippies became punks or yuppies,” Terje Toomistu, an Estonian anthropologist and the director of the documentary, explained. “In the Soviet Union stagnation somehow gave the movement the necessary framework to last for generations. It allowed hippies to live cheaply, to travel, [and to] survive.” The Sistema disbanded along with the Soviet Union itself. The return to individual nation-states made travel around the former union more difficult; the superstructure they were defining themselves against had disappeared. Many of the film’s subjects, though, never abandoned the styles and music they had adopted decades before. “To be a Soviet hippy was a heavy, almost existential choice,” Ms Toomistu said. “Once a hippy, always a hippy.” The Soviet state did engineer these souls after all. Details of future screenings of “Soviet Hippies” can be found here