Plagued by Fire: The Dreams and Furies of Frank Lloyd Wright. By Paul Hendrickson. Knopf; 624 pages; $35. Bodley Head; £25. THE LINEAMENTS of Frank Lloyd Wright’s life are well known. Widely considered America’s greatest architect, he created a unique style of building that was absolutely his own, indigenous to the United States. Central to his interiors, writes Paul Hendrickson in his new book “Plagued by Fire”, is “the intertwined idea of openness and flow”. “Wright was out to ‘break the box’, to destroy for ever those tight, draped, dark, horsehair, closed-off Victorian rooms of our nineteenth-century forebears. He wanted to let light and space in, air in, life in.” Earlier this year, eight of his buildings—including the Guggenheim Museum in New York (1956), Fallingwater in Pennsylvania (1935) and Taliesin in Wisconsin (1911, rebuilt in 1914 and 1925)—were added to the UNESCO World Heritage List, putting them alongside Stonehenge and the Pyramids of Giza.  Wright’s life was as dramatic as his work was cool and collected. Born on June 8th 1867 in Richland Center, Wisconsin, he lived to be nearly 92; he died in hospital near Scottsdale, Arizona in April 1959. He married his first wife, Kitty Tobin, when she was just 18 and he was 22; they parted around 1909, when he left her for Mamah Borthwick Cheney, the wife of a client in Oak Park, Chicago. Mr Hendrickson’s book begins with the shocking and dramatic murder of Cheney and six other people—including Cheney’s two children—in Wright’s Taliesin home on August 15th 1914. The murderer was a servant named Julian Carlton, who killed them all with a hand-axe before setting fire to the house (Wright was not at home). “Now a blow had fallen like the lightning stroke,” Wright wrote in his autobiography. “In 30 minutes the house and all in it had burned to the stone work or to the ground.” These dreadful events have proved irresistible to novelists—see T. C. Boyle’s “The Women” and Nancy Horan’s “Loving Frank”. But it is Mr Hendrickson’s contention that Wright’s account of his own life is to be taken with a grain of salt: he calls Wright’s autobiography “one of the great memoirs of the twentieth century even if you must distrust it on every page.” It is this atmosphere of distrust, of questioning, that saturates Mr Hendrickson’s weighty investigation of the architect’s life. “Plagued by Fire” is not, in the author’s thinking, a biography at all. “Rather, this book is meant as a kind of synecdoche,” he writes, “with selected pockets in a life standing for the oceanic whole of that life.” This can be hard going. Mr Hendrickson—whose book “Hemingway’s Boat” (2012) traced the author’s life through an account of his beloved boat, Pilar—is never a man to use one word where five will do (see the description of those Victorian rooms above). The book is full of the kind of speculation and assumption that can be maddening. What Mr Hendrickson calls a “coded and poignant” exchange of letters between Wright and his friend Cecil Corwin could also be described as fairly straightforward. He hints at a possible flirtation between Wright and the poet Carl Sandberg, observing a broadcast the two men did together in 1957. “Oh, just a theory, and possibly all dewy,” Mr Hendrickson ends his musing. The reader may murmur: indeed. Which is to say: beware. If you like this kind of thing, you’ll like this kind of thing. If you do not already have a good grasp, however, of Wright’s life and work, all the zigzagging and question-asking may leave you feeling rather at sea in the oceanic whole.