LUCE (KELVIN HARRISON JR) is an overachiever. He is the valedictorian of his class, a precocious and skilled debater and a champion athlete. Adopted from war-torn Eritrea, where he was forced to become a child soldier, Luce seems to have come to terms with his past trauma and prospered in his new life in America. His white adoptive parents, Peter and Amy (Tim Roth and Naomi Watts), dote on him. Things start to unravel when Luce is set an assignment to produce an essay from the point of view of a historical figure. He chooses Frantz Fanon, a revolutionary and writer from the French colony of Martinique, who argued in “The Wretched of The Earth” (1961) that violence is justified if it brings about racial equality. Luce’s engagement with these ideas is taken as a statement of nefarious intent by his teacher, Ms Wilson (Octavia Spencer).  When Ms Wilson raises her concerns, Luce maintains that it was merely an academic exercise. Amy argues that her son deserves the benefit of the doubt, pointing to his kind character and exemplary school record. Yet Ms Wilson (who is also black) decides to search his locker and, finding contraband fireworks, considers them more evidence that his cool, charming exterior is only a front. Rather than taking the matter to the headteacher, she tries to induce his family to deal with the transgression so that his stellar reputation at school is preserved. The question of Luce’s ideological position propels the drama, which is based on a play of the same name by J.C. Lee from 2013. Is he partaking of the usual secretive, if occasionally dangerous, exploits of teenage life, or returning to the violence of his youth, as supposed by Ms Wilson? When should students be trusted, and when suspected? These are questions with no easy answers, and in “Luce” they have fraught racial dimensions. The events are presented almost entirely from the adults’ perspective, which makes Luce a slippery, fascinating character. Indeed, Luce’s identity often seems to reside in the eye of the beholder. One of his friends, who is white, asserts that he is not “really black”. Another, a black student who has not enjoyed the same trappings of middle-class life, tells Luce angrily that “there can only be one Obama”. Julius Olah, the film’s director, hoped to question what it means to fit in as a young black man in a liberal suburb. “You’re constantly changing the mask that you’re wearing depending on the context,” he has said. “That’s what it takes to survive.” Some of the most engaging scenes depict the clashes between Luce and Ms Wilson. A disagreement over whether he has a right to privacy at school turns into a wider discussion about the best way to effect change. Ms Wilson tells Luce that he should play by the rules and accept the difficulties of succeeding in an unjust society; Luce, echoing Fanon, argues that he should be free to be himself, and that invidious rules and expectations should be rejected. It is a rare thriller that grapples with big ideas, yet “Luce” succeeds in balancing them with human drama. The film is meant to be uncomfortable viewing, and resists easy moralising and clear resolutions. “I want [viewers] to challenge their own experience,” Mr Olah said, “and ask themselves how they are participating in the way privilege and power operate in this country, and in our world.” “Luce” was released in America in August. It is playing in British cinemas now