WAR BEGETS war. And as well as death, migration, hunger, patriotism and cynicism, it also begets art, as a new multimedia exhibition at the Museum of Modern Art’s (MoMA) PS1 outpost in Queens, New York, demonstrates. The show takes visitors on a tour of conflict in the Persian Gulf, starting with Iraq’s invasion of Kuwait in 1990, through the two Gulf wars to Barack Obama’s withdrawal of American troops in 2011. “Theatre of Operations” spans three floors and more than 300 works of art. A recurring theme is how wagers of war seek to deny the humanity of their rivals. “Gulf War TV War” (1991, pictured below) by Michel Auder, a French-American artist, explores the dispassionate way in which the First Gulf War was presented on American television. It splices together clips from network news stations with commercials and sitcoms from the same era: one moment an anchor traces the path of an airstrike, the next the “Golden Girls” are sitting down to slices of cheesecake. It offers insight into Americans’ TV diet at the time, in which military engagement is just one faraway part. The people most affected by the fighting are hardly glimpsed.  Jamal Penjweny, a photographer born in what is today Kurdistan, highlights this erasure in “Saddam is Here” (pictured top), a series of portraits of Iraqi civilians. There is a dentist in scrubs, a woman in her undergarments and a butcher in a meat locker: in each image, they cover their faces with the same black-and-white photograph of Saddam Hussein. The photographs underscore the conflation of Iraqi civilians with Hussein who, for Americans, became a symbol of evil. Where in Mr Auder’s work the media and military technology symbolise a disconnect between Americans and the bloodshed, Iraqi artists use such imagery to forge links. In “Autumn Solo Show (Work in Progress)”, Ali Eyal uses satellite footage to narrate a personal story; with images from Google Earth, he overlays land that his family lost during the America invasion of Iraq in 2003 with colour. The resulting paintings highlight the land’s transformation, with brown for destruction and decay, yellow and green for regeneration and rebirth. In similar fashion, “Shadow Sites II”, a film by Jananne Al-Ani, an Iraqi-born artist, merges aerial photographs of the region’s modern landscapes with images that hint at the Gulf’s ancient architectural history. A shot of a barren stretch of desert slowly reveals Roman ruins; vast steppes become prehistoric agricultural settlements. Rather than reducing the region to territory to be gained or lost, her film uses the “aerial gaze” to expose its complexity and human history. The internet offered an opportunity for people to share their stories and show their faces. From 2003 to 2005 Sean Snyder, an American artist, scoured Flickr, a photo-sharing platform, for images taken by soldiers and contractors in Iraq. His collection is mostly made up of photographs of dusty mosques, children, stray dogs, street signs and sunsets, though there are pictures of guns and Humvees, too. The most striking image shows a small, bonneted Iraqi child staring up searchingly at the camera, as if to ask for an explanation of the chaos. The result is a portrait of combat zones that is grounded in the experience of military personnel and Iraqi citizens. “Theatre of Operations” lays bare the ways in which the portrayals of war can neglect—or draw attention to—the humanity of those afflicted. Such visual choices have repercussions. Wars can seem less deadly, and less morally suspect, if they are far away; if they are rendered in terms of the weapons used rather than the lives lost, they lose their urgency. This thoughtful exhibition focuses on one regional conflict, but its lessons are universal. “Theatre of Operations: The Gulf Wars 1991-2011” is at MoMA PS1 until March 1st 2020. Image credits: “Saddam is Here” (2010), courtesy the artist. “Gulf War TV War” (1991), courtesy the artist and Martos Gallery, New York.