ARIEL SKIPPED around the island, trailing a ribbon behind her. In this version of “The Tempest”—staged last week at the Rose Theatre in Kingston, south of London, by the staff and pupils of the Bedelsford School for disabled children—the island was played by a young man in a wheelchair. The climax was a song adapted from some of Prospero’s lines: “We are such stuff / As dreams are made on; and our little life / Is rounded with a sleep.” The moving performance was part of the Shakespeare Schools Festival (SSF), an annual event that offers insights into British education, the country’s preoccupations and the playwright’s versatile oeuvre. The SSF is the world’s largest youth-drama festival. This year it involves more than 20,000 children from over 750 British schools, performing concise versions of Shakespeare’s plays in 118 professional theatres; around 300,000 students have participated since the scheme began 18 years ago. At the theatre in Kingston, Coombe Hill Junior School offered a hip-hop-inflected rendition of “Romeo and Juliet”. The square in Verona became a school playground, the Duke a headmaster who expels Romeo for bad behaviour. Coombe Girls’ School cross-dressed “Julia Caesar”; the doomed leader posed for selfies before being stabbed at a nightclub. The death scenes in “Anthony and Cleopatra” (Epsom and Ewell High School) were hauntingly lurid.  The pressures of the curriculum, plus squeezes on funding and teachers’ time, mean that, if it weren’t for the festival, many British children wouldn’t get the chance to try out Shakespearean acting. Vanishingly few would do so on a professional stage: the lights and the paying audience “up the stakes”, says Ruth Brock, chief executive of the Shakespeare Schools Foundation (which runs the festival). “I was quite taken aback by the sheer size of it,” Kia Miller of Coombe Girls’ School said of the Rose’s auditorium, amid the post-show euphoria of the lobby. Still, when it came down to it, “it wasn’t as scary as I thought it would be.” Shakespeare, the festival attests, is more than a tool of learning: he is a bedrock of national identity, even a bond in a divided country. In Northern Ireland, Ms Brock notes, the festival has united Protestant and Catholic families, who ordinarily have little to do with each other, in the stalls and on the stage. Many of the actors have never previously been into a theatre, let alone appeared in one. Adrian Packer of the CORE Education Trust—which runs six schools in Birmingham, several of which have taken part—sees a parallel between the ideas that Shakespeare is “hard”, and that some children are “hard to reach”. In both cases, he reckons, the difficulty is in the eye of the beholder. Children from families that do not speak English at home, he observes, find the Shakespearean lexicon simpler to pick up, since they are used to mastering new languages. Some find it easier to discuss “how they fit in or don’t” through the characters they are asked to inhabit. The experience, Mr Packer says, instils a new concept of discipline—as a virtue with rewards, rather than just being told to be quiet. An artistic undertaking of this breadth is also a clue to the national mood. After all, trends in Shakespearean productions always reflect shifts in feeling and ideology: think of the popularity of “Hamlet”, with its rotten state, coups and surveillance, in Eastern Europe at the fag-end of communism, or the fad for “King Lear” in the disintegrating Russia of the 1990s. Shakespeare’s drama is bound to make student-actors think, since—as Ms Brock puts it—he asks them “to be both beggar and king, to be tyrant and victim”. She recalls a recent staging of “Othello” by a school affected by racism, stabbings and drive-by shootings. And in the last few festivals, schools have gravitated to overtly political plays. Last year, several Caesars took to the stage in red baseball caps. A cast from a primary school in London sang “O Julius Caesar” to the tune of “Oh, Jeremy Corbyn” (used to serenade the leader of the Labour Party). Shakespeare “isn’t something you can break,” says Ms Brock. “It is infinitely adaptable.”