MANY OF THOSE who amble around the eight Royal Parks in London are seeking an escape from the noisy city beyond. That tranquility belies a bloody past, as is made clear by a small exhibition called “Play, Protests and Pelicans”, currently on show at the Garden Museum in Lambeth. Throughout their history the Royal Parks have been fields of gore, the sites of hangings, duels and violent riots. The first victims were unfortunate fauna. The parks were originally sanctuaries reserved for the royal family to hunt in. The story began in Greenwich where, in 1427, Henry VI licensed 200 acres to the Duke of Gloucester to hunt deer away from the peasants and (in theory) the poachers. Henry VIII, whose passion for hunting knew few bounds, founded three private hunting grounds. In 1529 came Bushy Park, to the west of the city, a gift from Cardinal Wolsey (he also threw in Hampton Court Palace for good measure). St James’s Park was created in 1533, on the site of a former leper hospital. Finally there was Hyde Park, which Henry confiscated from a monastery in the Manor of Tyburn in 1536.  The fields remained the private domains of kings until the time of Oliver Cromwell. Charles I had created London’s largest park, Richmond, a 2,500-acre fenced-in wilderness, in 1637. But when Cromwell prevailed in the English civil war, the newly appointed Lord Protector took the Royal Parks into government control. By the time the monarchy was restored in 1660, the idea had taken hold that the spaces should be open to the public, a concept that was eventually enshrined in law in 1851. Charles II, who had returned from exile in France to sit on the English throne, brought home with him a sense of wonderment at the wide walkways and formal grandeur that he had seen at the Palace of Versailles. The king wanted something similar for himself. So he turned St James’s Park into an approximation, with formal lakes and striking avenues that beat a path between two of his residences, Buckingham Palace and St James’s Palace. It was around this time that the parks—and Green Park in particular—became favoured sites for duelling. Possibly the most famous was between William Pulteney, the leader of the opposition, and Lord Hervey, a supporter of Robert Walpole’s government. (Walpole had, incidentally, been the ranger of Richmond Park.) The pair drew swords over an alleged slight, but were separated by their seconds before either was seriously injured. Others weren’t so fortunate. In 1712 both Charles Mohun and James Douglas were killed while duelling one another in Hyde Park, after falling out over an inheritance. But perhaps the bloodiest corner of these regal hunting grounds was the Tyburn gallows. Some 50,000 convicts were hanged there between 1196 and 1783 (when they were taken down). Executions often attracted large crowds. The doomed had the right to make a final speech to the assembled masses; often they took the opportunity to rail against the authorities who had condemned them. Thus the area gained a reputation as a haven of free speech, eventually culminating in Speakers’ Corner, which today stands close to the site of the erstwhile gallows. The right of people to expound on whichever subject they chose at Speakers’ Corner was passed into law in 1872. The Royal Parks had by that time become the preferred place for angry protesters to congregate. (In this they were aided, unwittingly, by the changes Charles II had ushered in—those new avenues and lawns being perfect to accommodate large demonstrations.) In 1855 perhaps 750,000 people gathered—and then ran amok—to rail against new licensing laws that restricted the sale of booze. In 1866 thousands marched to demand that the franchise be extended. When they found themselves locked out of Hyde Park a riot ensued. Such events concentrated the authorities’ minds, leading to the Parks Regulation Act in 1872, which gave the parks their own dedicated police force. Protests continued unabated. Hyde Park was the scene of several anti-fascist rallies between the wars; the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament attracted 200,000 marchers in 1983. Yet such anti-war demonstrations are only half the story, for the Royal Parks loom large in military history books, too. These wide-open spaces in the heart of the capital were the scene not only of army recruitment fairs and troop staging posts, but also for battle planning and barracks. The Horse Guards have been housed in Hyde Park since the 18th century; American soldiers were stationed there during the second world war. Those who came home maimed from the trenches of the first world war, meanwhile, were cared for at the Star & Garter Home, built by the gates of Richmond Park in 1916. Despite their savage histories, as “Play, Protests and Pelicans” makes clear, the Royal Parks have evolved into places of pleasure. Think of the magnificent Crystal Palace, built in Hyde Park for the Great Exhibition of 1851 (although the building met a grisly end, burning to the ground in 1936, having been moved to south London). Or the time, in 1919, that 17-year-old Sylva Boyden became the first female British parachutist, when she landed in Richmond Park. Or when the Rolling Stones played a free concert in Hyde Park in 1969, bringing the curtain down on flower power for the half a million hippies lazing in the sun. Or ten years later, when Queen Elizabeth II used the same venue for a huge children’s party, accommodating 160,000 guests. But what of the pelicans of the exhibition’s title? In these giant birds, perhaps, lies proof that the parks’ bloody past is not so easily escaped. The original beasts were given to Charles II by a Russian ambassador. Their descendants still roam St James’s Park today. It is not unknown, while horrified tourists look on, for one to lure an unsuspecting pigeon into its giant bill. And then—glug—they are no more. “Play, Protest and Pelicans: A People’s History of London’s Royal Parks” continues at the Garden Museum until February 9th 2020 Correction: This piece originally said that Thomas Cromwell prevailed in in the English civil war. It was, of course, Oliver Cromwell. Also, Greenwich was created during the reign of Henry VI, not Henry IV. Apologies.