SILENT MOVIES were never silent. Cinema’s earliest pioneers may not have figured out how to synchronise moving pictures and recorded sound, but their films had audio accompaniment, whether from orchestras and organists or from percussionists adding gunshots and thunder. Sometimes actors would speak into microphones behind the screen so that films had talking in them even before they were “talkies”. In all sorts of ways, the industry acknowledged that visuals alone were not enough. Cinema-goers wanted to hear something, too. “Making Waves: The Art of Cinematic Sound” chronicles how Hollywood went about providing that something. Directed by Midge Costin, a sound editor herself, this enthusiastic documentary employs a wealth of film clips and interviews with A-list directors to argue that the aural part of the cinema experience is still undervalued. “People always talk about the look of a film,” says David Lynch. “They don’t talk so much about the sound of a film”. But sound is used, in Ms Costin’s words, “to shape narrative, reveal character, elucidate ideas, and to express emotion”. It is “50% of [a] motion picture”.  Synchronised sound came in with “Don Juan” in 1926, and synchronised speech followed in 1927 with “The Jazz Singer”, starring Al Jolson. But sophisticated sound design wasn’t born until 1933, when Murray Spivack created the giant ape’s bellow in “King Kong” by mixing a lion’s roar with a tiger’s roar, and playing it backwards at half-speed. Cece Hall did something similar on “Top Gun” more than 50 years later. Actual fighter-plane engines “sounded kind of wimpy”, she recalls, so she concocted her own substitute from big-cat growls and monkey screeches. The producers nearly fired her for her pains, she says, but she went on to win an Oscar. Other sonic pioneers included Orson Welles, who had a background in radio drama, and Alfred Hitchcock, who contrasted silence and sudden noise to build and release tension. Directors aside, it was a veteran sound-effect expert, Jack Foley, who jangled his keys to simulate the clank of the Romans’ armour in Stanley Kubrick’s “Spartacus” (1960). The practice of recording specific noises for films was labelled “Foley” in his honour. It took a while to catch on, though. In the mid-20th century, studios saved money by relying on their own limited sound libraries. They preferred to dub on the same ting of a ricocheting bullet in Western after Western rather than recording anything new. The Academy Awards didn’t hand out a sound-editing Oscar until 1963, when “It’s a Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad World” won, and the category was dropped again for much of the 1970s. If cinematic sound has been a little more respected recently, “Making Waves” credits the change to a handful of innovators. The most important was Walter Murch, who collaborated with Francis Ford Coppola on “The Godfather” and “The Conversation”—a thriller all about sound recording. His obsessive work on Mr Coppola’s “Apocalypse Now” (1979) is compared to that of an orchestra conductor’s: Mr Murch put different editors in charge of different noises—the whir of helicopters, the putter of riverboats—and then brought all of their contributions together. Meanwhile, Ben Burtt took audiences to a galaxy far far away in “Star Wars” (1977) by devising a lightsaber’s hums and crackles, and a robot’s bleeps and whistles. Suddenly, fans wanted to know who made those noises and how. It is a shame that “Making Waves” did not limit itself to that question. Instead, it goes on to cover dialogue, music, the sound department’s collegiate atmosphere, the role of women and the emotional toll of the job, and so it becomes as superficial as a 90-minute primer on, say, the history of actors and acting in cinema. But as rushed as it may be, it features some intriguing reminders of how much deliberation and painstaking craft goes into a film’s every squeak and rumble. Viewers may assume that the noises they hear during a scene are roughly the same as the noises the actors heard while the cameras were rolling. That, after all, is the illusion which sound editors conjure up. But it is an illusion. If a character is walking through the woods and the faint chirrup of crickets is on the soundtrack, it is there because somebody (or, rather, a team of somebodies) has placed that precise chirrup at that precise point at that precise volume in order to manipulate the audience’s feelings in a precise way. The chances are that no real crickets were recorded in the process. One of the pleasures of “Making Waves” is being shown the tricks of the Foley trade. Want the crunch of a shoe pressing down on the fragments of a broken wine glass? Try rolling a pine cone across a sheet of dried pasta. “Making Waves: The Art of Cinematic Sound” is screening in America now and in Britain from November 1st