Many of the modern world’s discontents are laid at the door of mounting inequality—perhaps unfairly. In his bestselling book, “Capital in the Twenty-First Century”, Thomas Piketty, a French economist, argued that under capitalism widening inequality is a normal state of affairs. But the research by Mr Piketty and his collaborator, Emmanuel Saez, is fiendishly complex. Two other studies—by Gerald Auten and David Splinter, American government economists, and by the Congressional Budget Office—produce markedly different results. Messrs Auten and Splinter find barely any change in the income share of the top 1% in America since the 1960s. As our briefing this week explains, a long, bitter academic battle looms over a phenomenon that is still only partially understood.  Two would-be purveyors of posh products to the top 1% are to become one. LVMH, the biggest beast in the luxury-goods market, is to take over Tiffany & Co, where Wall Street bond traders sink a few bucks to improve their chances of turning girlfriends into fiancées. The global luxury industry is estimated to be worth $281bn this year. Chinese shoppers, who account for a third of all sales, have added much of the fizz. The acquisition caps what has been a dazzling rise for LVMH since its boss and biggest shareholder, Bernard Arnault, took it over three decades ago. No one is yet promising them free Rolexes, but Britons grumbling about enduring yet another general-election campaign can at least look forward to some handouts whatever the outcome. All the parties are proposing increases in government spending over the levels in projections by the government’s Office for Budget Responsibility in March. Labour is in a league of its own, with a promised splurge in current spending of an additional £80bn ($103bn) a year. The Conservatives are less lavish, though they too prefer spending to tax cuts. True to form, the Liberal Democrats split the difference. By 2040 solar and wind power might produce more than 35% of the world’s electricity. But both sources of energy are fickle: winds abate; clouds block the sun. If the world is to wean itself off filthy fossil-fuels, the ability to stockpile energy on a vast scale will be of supreme importance. So it is good news that the technology behind stationary power storage (think of a large metal shed stuffed with piles of big batteries) is getting cheaper and attracting investment. From Oslo to Milan, grumpy natives fret about the emergence in their cities of poor immigrant districts—ghettos—that no longer feel like the country they grew up in. So some governments, such as Denmark’s have made efforts to break them up. America, though also worried about racially segregated ghettos, has made only half-hearted attempts to prevent them. But data from the Census Department show that big cities across America are becoming less segregated. An average white resident of the 100 largest cities lives in an area that is 72% white, down from 79% in 2000.