AN UNANNOUNCED VISIT at Thanksgiving to the troops in Afghanistan by an American president facing re-election next year is perhaps to be expected. But after doling out turkey and mashed potatoes to homesick soldiers, Donald Trump did pull something of a surprise. He revealed that his administration had resumed talks with the Taliban insurgency. In September he had abruptly declared these negotiations dead, on the eve of what he said were planned talks with the Taliban at the presidential retreat at Camp David. He told troops at Bagram Airfield near Kabul that they were back on: “The Taliban wants to make a deal and we are meeting with them.” Mr Trump said he still wanted to cut the numbers of American soldiers in Afghanistan from 12,000-13,000 now to 8,600, but added: “We’re going to stay until such time as we have a deal, or we have total victory, and they [the Taliban] want to make a deal very badly.” Scant detail was given, but the insurgents would accept a truce, he claimed. “We say it has to be a ceasefire and they didn’t want to do a ceasefire, and now they want to do a ceasefire, I believe.”  The president’s decision to kill off a year-long process involving a series of talks with the Taliban in the Qatari capital, Doha, had always looked badly thought through. A draft deal was supposedly on the verge of agreement in September. It was not to his liking, and an ill-timed Taliban attack in which an American soldier was killed prompted his repudiation of it. He had little option, however, than to try again. The Afghan government, backed by Washington and its NATO allies, remains weak and has slowly lost ground. Military victory is impossible; a stalemate is costly in money and lives; and a precipitous withdrawal would probably intensify the country’s civil war. Achieving some kind of political settlement is America’s best bet. Efforts to resurrect the talks began almost as soon as Mr Trump had killed them off. The Taliban said their door was still open, and America’s allies urged Mr Trump to relent. American and Taliban envoys have been meeting, albeit unofficially, to pave the way for a resumption. A prisoner swap freeing two Western academics, including an American, held hostage by the Taliban may have given Mr Trump enough to point to as an achievement that justified changing tack. Yet it is far from clear that anything significant has changed in the two sides’ positions since September. The draft deal had included a timetable for an American withdrawal, in return for Taliban assurances that international terrorist groups such as al-Qaeda would not be allowed to base themselves on Afghan soil. Talks between the Afghan government and the insurgents would follow. Top of the agenda would be a ceasefire. Many in Kabul and Washington thought that package, without an immediate ceasefire, left the Taliban in too strong a position. The Afghan government and its international backers see a truce, or at least a reduction of violence, as essential to show the Taliban are serious about peace, not just conquest. Ashraf Ghani, the Afghan president, who has been sidelined from talks, will have been delighted by Mr Trump’s prominent mention of a ceasefire, the absence of which had been one of his main gripes with the September draft. His forces endure awful casualties, as do Afghan civilians. But Western officials who have been following the talks say it is unclear what sort of ceasefire Mr Trump meant. It may be that, as in previous Taliban offers, it covers simply Taliban attacks on American but not Afghan forces. That would not satisfy Mr Ghani. The Taliban themselves have yet to give any clarification. In the past they have said the draft deal would be the starting-point for new talks. A Taliban spokesman gave mixed messages, first telling reporters the group was ready to reopen them, then saying it was too early to discuss the issue. Feeling they have the momentum on the battlefield, the Taliban may not yet be ready to talk turkey.