ON A WARM night in April Pedro Sánchez, Spain’s acting prime minister, basked in the acclaim of a large crowd of euphoric supporters outside the headquarters of his Socialist party after he had won a general election, though coming well short of a majority. In the same place on the raw, cold night of November 10th, Mr Sánchez offered a crowd almost outnumbered by journalists only flat, perfunctory remarks to the effect that one way or another Spain will get the “progressive government” he has promised. That goal, however, has only become harder. The Socialists were again the largest party, but with only 120 of the 350 seats in Congress, down three on April. The big change was that Vox, a hard-right Spanish nationalist party, surged into third place, with 52 seats and 15% of the vote, up five percentage points on its result earlier this year as a neophyte. Its rise came partly at the expense of Ciudadanos, a rudderless formerly centrist party, which was wiped out, losing three-fifths of its vote and 47 seats. Albert Rivera, its founding leader, resigned on November 11th.  The voters thus punished, to varying degrees, those they held responsible for failing to form a government after April, and subjecting Spaniards to the fourth general election in as many years. In the spring Mr Rivera deprived the country of the only real prospect of a strong, reformist government by setting his face against an agreement with Mr Sánchez. The prime minister half-heartedly offered a coalition government to Podemos, a further-left party, only to see his offer rejected before he yanked it back. Mr Sánchez’s advisers had been confident that a repeat election would see the Socialists picking up an extra 20 seats or so. As for Podemos, it lost seven seats, two of them to a new left-wing splinter party. At 70%, turnout was down by six points, and that hurt the left. The campaign was dominated by the conflict in Catalonia, after the Supreme Court last month imposed swingeing prison sentences on nine Catalan separatist leaders for their role in the illegal referendum and declaration of independence in October 2017. That prompted days of sometimes violent protests in Barcelona. The more radical branches of Catalan separatism did well. In all, pro-independence parties claimed 43% of the vote in Catalonia, up from 39% in April—but still well short of half. The threat to national unity posed by Catalan secessionism has fuelled the rise of Vox, which wants to suppress Spain’s sweeping regional autonomy. Vox claims closer kinship with the Catholic nationalism of Poland’s ruling Law and Justice party rather than France’s National Front (now National Rally) or Italy’s Northern League. But in this campaign it aped those movements by appealing to fear of illegal immigrants claiming welfare benefits (even though few actually do). It also sought to revive nostalgia for Francisco Franco, Spain’s dictator of 1939-75 and brutal victor of its civil war, whose remains Mr Sánchez exhumed last month from his grandiose monument outside Madrid. What now? The failure of Spain’s politicians to create a strong governing majority is both cause and consequence of the country’s deteriorating and potentially dangerous political mood. It comes with a previously strong economic recovery losing steam. Unemployment, still at nearly 14%, has almost stopped falling. And the conflict in Catalonia remains an open wound, one that also makes coalition-forming much harder. Most of the political leaders recognise that the deadlock must be broken. Mr Sánchez said he will talk to all parties except those “who have excluded themselves from coexistence”, meaning Vox and some Catalan and Basque separatists. He has only two options. He could try and cobble together a majority among a disparate group of left-wing and nationalist parties. More probably he will seek the abstention of the mainstream conservative People’s Party (PP), which governed from 2011 to 2018. It won 88 seats, 22 more than in April, though Vox curtailed its hopes of a bigger recovery. During the campaign Pablo Casado, the PP’s leader, said that Mr Sánchez should resign if the Socialists lost seats. But on election night he was prudent and statesmanlike, saying he would wait to hear from the prime minister. It will not be easy for Mr Casado to facilitate a Socialist government, still less agree to a grand coalition as some Spaniards would like. He is constrained by Vox, which may well make more gains if he does that. And many in his party have not forgiven Mr Sánchez for his dogmatic refusal in 2016 to abstain when the PP was in an analogous situation to the Socialists today (albeit not such a weak one). Much hard bargaining lies ahead. The new parliament looks unlikely to last its full four-year term.