IN THE 1920s New York City was not known for its art scene. Paris was the undisputed centre of the art world, and Europe was the source of any work believed worth buying. Manhattan had the Metropolitan Museum of Art uptown and a few commercial galleries in midtown, but they typically peddled the kind of safe, canonised work (landscapes, Old Masters) preferred by the city’s wealthy elite. Few gallerists sold American art. Those that did preferred their artists male, white and dead. Edith Halpert, a young Russian-Jewish immigrant with a taste for art and a knack for advertising, noticed a gap in the market. She saw that the city was filled with artists, but no one was buying or selling their work. She also saw that the city was filled with consumers, but no one was trying to sell them art. So she decided in 1926 to open a gallery of her own in a modest brownstone in bohemian Greenwich Village, where she would sell art by Americans who were still very much alive. She would appeal to uptown patrons with deep pockets and philanthropic ideals, but she was especially keen to cultivate ordinary, middle-class customers who simply wanted something special for their homes. Art, she believed, belonged to everybody, and artists benefit when their works sell, even at affordable prices.  Nearly 100 years on, Halpert’s influence—on the city, American art and the art world in general—has been profound. Her adventurous sensibility can be felt in a number of big public collections around the country, including the Museum of Modern Art in New York (MoMA), the Phillips Collection in Washington, DC, and the Philadelphia Museum of Art, where she helped sculpt the founding collections by advising the benefactors who donated them. Her fingerprints are all over the contemporary embrace of folk art and industrial design, which she hailed years before museums recognised their value. And she should be credited for the lasting success of many American artists, including Stuart Davis, Jacob Lawrence and Ben Shahn, whom she supported well before the art world took notice. Yet few know Halpert’s name. Even Rebecca Shaykin, the curator of a new exhibition about the gallerist’s life and legacy at the Jewish Museum in New York, learned about her only after stumbling on Lindsay Pollock’s biography, “The Girl with the Gallery” (2006). “I couldn’t believe the story of this woman I had never heard of before,” she says. This show should help resuscitate Halpert’s reputation as an essential 20th-century tastemaker, a savvy salesperson and a self-made woman in what was very much a man’s world. It includes around 100 works of American modern and folk art, most of which were either exhibited at Halpert’s gallery or part of her own private collection (reassembled here for the first time since its sale after her death in 1970). There are vivid biomorphic paintings by Arthur Dove, political works on paper by Shahn, rounded wooden figures by Elie Nadelman, flat still lifes by Charles Sheeler, some subtly erotic flora from Georgia O’Keeffe, and quite a few weathervanes, for which Halpert had a regrettable weakness (a rare lapse in her otherwise prescient good taste). Halpert often displayed these works among bookshelves and fireplaces in rooms that were warm and inviting, to help buyers imagine the pieces in their own homes. She also pioneered end-of-season sales (“$100 Exhibitions”) and interest-free instalment plans, adopting retail strategies she picked up from a job at Macy’s. She delighted in the fact that by 1944 almost half her sales were to first-time buyers. Halpert admired the ways Parisian galleries helped sustain local artists, and she sought to do the same in New York. Some of the most vibrant, arresting works in this show are by Davis, for whom Halpert arranged a stipend when his work consistently failed to sell (the New York Times called his “Egg Beater” painting of 1927, pictured above, “quite incomprehensible”). Following the attack on Pearl Harbour, the federal government put Yasuo Kuniyoshi, a Japanese-American artist, under house arrest and froze his assets, which inspired Halpert to stage a big retrospective of his work. When she took on Lawrence in 1942, she was the first mainstream dealer in New York to represent a black artist. She exhibited his monumental “Migration Series” (“This is Harlem” is pictured below) in its entirety in a solo show, and then negotiated its sale to the Phillips Collection and MoMA, thereby ensuring its legacy. “I always owe Edith Halpert,” Lawrence once said. It seems fitting that Americans came to appreciate their own art with the help of an immigrant. Halpert embraced her adopted country with the gratitude of a refugee who had a chance to thrive. Yet she had an outsider’s appreciation of the fact that American art came from American artists, who were a diverse lot. She made space in her gallery for women, minorities and fellow immigrants, and she worked to ensure the eclectic work on the walls reflected the variety of potential customers who came through the door. For Halpert, American art was a natural extension of the country’s democracy. “Edith Halpert and the Rise of American Art” continues at the Jewish Museum, New York, until February 9th 2020