EVEN ITS most ardent admirers will admit that the Tatra T77A (pictured below) is an oddity. It is long and low-slung, almost porpoise-shaped, with a rounded front, tapered rear and a fin running along its spine. The windscreen is divided into three sections, and most models sport a third, central headlight, like an extra eye in a children’s-book illustration of an alien. But this Czechoslovakian automobile, designed by Paul Jaray and Hans Ledwinka in 1934, was, when it was created, the last word in aerodynamic streamlining and the very idea of modernity. Its bulbous teardrop profile—Jaray’s background was in designing zeppelins—was copied by the designers of other, unrelated objects to make them more enticing. Hats, an iron and even a meat slicer borrowed the taut curves of the new automotive. The T77A is one of the 15 cars and more than 250 other works the Victoria and Albert museum in London has pressed into service at a new exhibition, “Cars: Accelerating the Modern World”. It also illustrates the three main themes that the curators have chosen. The first, “Going Fast”, shows how ease of movement and the idea of speed were fundamental to the development of the car. The very first automobiles were seen less as means of transport than of elite leisure: an expensive, cacophonous form of horse racing, with huge silver trophies and drivers who raced in the car-owner’s colours.  Later, when more people began to think of cars as a way of getting from A to B, the journey was imagined as a fast-paced experience, with individual machines moving like blood platelets through arterial roadways. More often than not, these fantastical journeys were not inhibited by gravity. As early as 1902, when Albert Robida, an illustrator, was trying to imagine chic Parisians of the year 2000 (pictured top), he envisioned them flying through the air in cars that, like the T77A, resembled marine mammals. (The flying car has long been a staple of the popular imagination. It features in a clip from Luc Besson’s beloved sci-fi film of 1997, “The Fifth Element”; the exhibit’s denouement is the Pop.Up Next self-driving car, which has four drone-like propellers from which the body of the vehicle is suspended.) Manufacturers of vehicles were also obsessed with speed and convenience. “Making More”, the show’s second act, begins with Henry Ford and the production of the Model-T automobile. His assembly line, a concept borrowed from meat-processing plants, allowed him to create cars faster and cheaper than his competitors. Its impact was enormous and wide-ranging. Ford-esque assembly lines were adopted for the making of all kinds of consumer goods; affordable, standardised and factory-made goods largely replaced craft objects. Meanwhile the aesthetics of robots and factories bled into popular culture, from music to fashion. The final section, “Shaping Space”, demonstrates how, in a little over a century, the love of and dependence on the car has led mankind to redesign the world in its image. Millions of miles of smooth, paved roads have had to be built and maintained. (Images from a global road survey, undertaken by Michelin in the 1930s, give some idea of just how much work had to be done.) Crude oil was needed for these thirsty machines; amid fears of fossil-fuel shortages, extraction methods have become ever more extreme. Some have even clamoured for the use of nuclear power in engines. Throughout this thoughtful and cleverly designed show—crash dummies as mannequins, vitrines shaped like little trucks—two themes recur. The first is the way that humans have shaped themselves to the car’s contours. The national identity of Iran, for example, has become meshed with the distinctive Paykan, first produced in 1967. A song originally commissioned by the car’s manufacturers to celebrate an anniversary is now universally used to wish people happy birthday. Vibrant subcultures, such as spinning in South Africa, low-riding in California and dune racing in Dubai, have formed around vehicles, defining the clothes, behaviours, friendships and aspirations of devotees. The films exploring these phenomena are a highlight of the exhibition. The second theme is the stubborn refusal to give up on automotive illusions. Ideas of freedom and ease persist in the more prosaic face of traffic jams and increasing fuel prices. Like all their forebears, the creators of the Pop.Up Next (pictured above)—a collaboration between ItalDesign, Airbus and Audi—foresee no traffic and no accidents: just speedy, seamless and thoroughly modern transportation. “Cars: Accelerating the Modern World” continues at the Victoria and Albert Museum, London, until April 19th 2020