COMMUNITIES ON THE Ganges delta in Bangladesh have lived between land and water for centuries. Most of the country is fewer than five metres above sea level; monsoon season lasts for four months, and it brings 80% of the annual rainfall (between 2,000 and 3,000 millimetres on average). Here, when the waters subside, buildings are erected quickly from wooden frames and corrugated metal sheets. If an area becomes uninhabitable, the structures can be dismantled and rebuilt with the same layout. Flooding will become even more frequent as the effects of climate change intensify. Flash floods are increasingly violent and tropical storms heavier. According to Natural Resources Defense Council, a charity, by 2050 rising sea levels will have submerged 17% of Bangladesh and displaced roughly 20m people. The drier northwestern regions, meanwhile, are at risk of drought.  Good design is essential if these challenges are to be addressed. The solutions are often straightforward. Since 2005 MTA, Marina Tabassum’s practice in Dhaka, the country’s capital, has used low-cost, sustainable substances in its designs. Local materials such as teak and red brick help to create jalees (lattices) and beras (perforated screens), which provide cheap shading, shelter and ventilation. The Bait Ur Rouf Mosque (pictured below), built in 2012, sits on a raised plinth to protect it from floodwater. The idea is to form buildings ideally suited to their environment, which almost grow from the site, says Ms Tabassum. She has also directed “Inheriting Wetness”, a documentary film, in which she reflects on the idea of land ownership amid the “continuous interplay of erosion and accretion—a unique phenomenon that has long shaped the lives of Bengalis”. The film has its premiere at the Sharjah Architecture Triennale in November. Rafiq Azam, the founder of Shatotto architects, is working on more than 20 projects in Dhaka, revitalising abandoned public parks and dengue-fever-infested waterways. “Almost all the green space in Old Dhaka plays host to vagrants and illegal activities,” he says. “Our research led us to ask; why are these spaces not working? Why are they vandalised? What can we do to protect them from prolonged monsoon and drought?” His design for the Shahid Abdul Alim Playground offers some answers. The 1.3-acre site, an illegally occupied field-cum-parking lot in Old Dhaka, has been turned into playing fields and a football pitch. Walls and fences that gave shelter to unlawful shops and squatters were removed, allowing the park to be completely open. Flooding was alleviated by planting trees and collecting rainwater. Mr Azam enlisted local children to plant a mix of greenery; he added an underground trench able to hold 500,000 litres of rainwater, which is then saved for drier periods. Peter Clegg, a founding partner of Feilden Clegg Bradley, a British architecture firm, took a different approach when building the Aga Khan Academy (pictured top), a not-for-profit school, which will open on a 20-acre plot in Dhaka in 2020. “Buildings need to cope with flash flooding,” he says. “They must be able to tolerate up to eight inches of rainwater for just a few hours”. Designed in collaboration with Shatotto, the academy is elevated from the ground. It features attenuation areas, five feet below ground level, which allow water to drain away, perforated brick facades to deal with heat and humidity and shaded paths and verandahs which allows the use of air-conditioning to be limited to classrooms. In 2018 Feilden Clegg Bradley created a two-storey mock-up of the Foundation, incorporating a typical classroom and student dorm in order to test internal conditions, materials and construction techniques. It is still being monitored to allow environmental performance to be assessed through a full seasonal cycle; the results of these tests will be used to improve the design. A weather station was also installed on site to provide reliable local climate data. West of Dhaka, on the flood plains of South Kanarchor, Saif Ul Haque Sthapati has created an “amphibious structure” for an area which is under three metres of water for several months of the year. The Arcadia Education Project—which houses a pre-school, a hostel for single women and a nursery—is anchored using posts drilled into a brick, earth and sandbag foundation, and sits on the ground or floats depending on the water level. The building is mostly made from different types of local bamboo, which was drifted along the river to the site. A substance made from boiled gaab fruit was used to waterproof the roof; most joints were tied with rope rather than steel wire to help stave off corrosion. Dhaka, one of the world’s fastest growing megacities, must reckon with the difficulties of a tropical monsoon climate. Unfortunately, it is in the grip of developers who favour expensive, inefficient concrete and glass towers, studded with air-conditioning units, over traditional techniques and local materials. “The challenge is how to raise the standard of living in Bangladesh to match our own without the carbon wastefulness,” says Mr Clegg. These buildings provide a blueprint.