RIAN JOHNSON is a writer-director who delights in toying with pulp genres, whether his budgets are low (“Brick”), high (“Looper”) or very high indeed (“Star Wars: The Last Jedi”). His new film, “Knives Out”, is an ingenious and stylish whodunnit which harks back to the Agatha Christie novels of the 1920s and 1930s, but which makes shrewd points about the rich in 2019. It is one of the year’s most political films as well as one of its most enjoyable. Mr Johnson’s witty country-house murder mystery revolves around Harlan Thrombey (Christopher Plummer), himself the author of countless bestselling murder mysteries. The morning after Harlan’s 85th birthday party, he is found in his study with his throat slashed. He appears to have done the slashing himself, but that night his ornate mansion was stocked with close relations who might have welcomed his death.  Among these self-regarding buffoons are a son (Michael Shannon) who runs Harlan’s publishing company but resents not having more control of it, a new-age daughter-in-law (Toni Colette), Harlan’s steely daughter (Jamie Lee Curtis), her unfaithful husband (Don Johnson) and their fast-living son (Chris Evans). Also present was Harlan’s devoted and apparently benign young nurse, Marta (Ana de Armas). The Thrombeys all insist that Marta is one of the family, although, in a good running joke, none of them can agree on which Latin American country she comes from. Enter Benoit Blanc (Daniel Craig, pictured), a consulting detective with a love of big cigars and florid phrases—and a Southern drawl even more luxuriant than the one Mr Craig deployed in Steven Soderbergh’s “Logan Lucky”. As he interviews the suspects, “Knives Out” flashes back to the evening of the party, and shows how everyone’s accounts match up, or don’t. The characters are all so colourfully flawed that it is slightly disappointing when they are pushed aside in the second act, and the film focuses on one central couple. But Mr Johnson’s intriguing and intricate puzzle does what only the best whodunnits can do, managing to entertain the viewer three times over: once while they’re watching events unfold, once when they hear the detective’s elaborate summing-up and they replay those events in their head, and once afterwards when they think of all the clues and complications that were dotted throughout. “Knives Out” also has the rare distinction of being a glamorous, star-studded detective yarn which does not rehash an Agatha Christie or Arthur Conan Doyle story that has been filmed a dozen times already. It is not the only new genre movie to be set in a country house, nor the only one to comment on the entitled American family within that house’s imposing walls. “Ready Or Not” (pictured above), a terrific horror-comedy, stars Samara Weaving as Grace, a young woman who marries into the wealthy Le Domas clan, but isn’t blue-blooded enough to please her new in-laws (played by Andie MacDowell and Adam Brody, among others). Her husband Alex (Mark O’Brien) says that it is his family that has the problem, not Grace, but he also insists that she go along with one of their more eccentric rituals and play a game of hide and seek on her wedding night. What he does not mention is that the family members doing the seeking will all be armed with antique weaponry, and that if they find Grace, they will kill her. A long white dress, it turns out, is just about the worst thing you can wear when you are racing along shadowy corridors and across dark lawns, trying to avoid crossbow-wielding maniacs. Written by Guy Busick and R. Christopher Murphy, and directed by Matt Bettinelli-Opin and Tyler Gillett, “Ready Or Not” may have a trashy, B-movie premise, but there is a surprising amount of character development and satirical depth to go with the jokes, twists and blood-spurting deaths. If it isn’t quite as clever as “Knives Out”, the two films would make a fascinating and fun double-bill. In both cases, the scions of an American dynasty have derived all their money from an entrepreneurial patriarch, but they behave as if they earned it themselves. And, however dysfunctional the clans may be, they will do whatever it takes to keep that money in the family. “Ready or Not” was released in August in America and in September in Britain. “Knives Out” is released in America and Britain on November 27th