FORGIVENESS IS EASY to preach, but often difficult to practise. In the face of an atrocious act the Christian ideal can seem to many people inappropriate. Even some Christian believers may see it as a distraction, a way of avoiding the truth, even an invitation to further wrongdoing. The theme runs through two new films, based on true events, about the Catholic church: “Grâce à Dieu” (“By the Grace of God”, pictured above), a haunting film about clerical crimes against children in France, and “The Two Popes” (pictured below), a drama about Pope Benedict XVI and Cardinal Jorge Bergoglio, who later succeeded him. Alexandre, the hero of “Grâce à Dieu” (played by Melvil Poupaud), is a conservative, family-minded bank executive whose comfortable and devout life is disturbed as childhood memories of being abused come back to haunt him. He initially seeks redress within the church. He meets people, including Cardinal Philippe Barbarin of Lyon, who profess to be shocked by his revelations.  A psychiatrist who works for the diocese arranges for Alexandre to meet his tormentor, who is still in active ministry, and she is disappointed when the priest fails to use the meeting to seek forgiveness. From the church’s point of view, an apology, followed by an acceptance, would have put an end to the matter with minimum fuss, but Alexandre is not convinced. He meets other victims of the abuser, including one who is a militant atheist and another who blames his ongoing sexual and personal dysfunctions on his childhood travails. Together they organise a campaign to demand exemplary punishment for the priest. Eventually the victims realise that they are facing an entire system of corruption and cronyism. Yet as a devout Catholic, Alexandre cannot break from the church entirely. In the final moments of the film, one of his five children asks him whether he still believes in God, and the question is left unanswered. Made by François Ozon, a director who was raised in a devout Catholic family but has lapsed from the faith, the film shows deep feeling for the beauty of Christian worship, and the warm atmosphere among devout church-goers who form a small but lively subculture in France. The film won the Jury Grand Prix at the Berlin Film Festival, but its makers had to overcome legal challenges before it could be distributed in France. (Real-life criminal proceedings against the abuser, Bernard Preynat, are still ongoing; he has been removed from the priesthood. Cardinal Barbarin was given a suspended six-month sentence in March for failing to respond quickly or firmly enough to the criminal activities.) “The Two Popes” shows less empathy with the faith itself—Fernando Meirelles, the film’s Brazilian director, professes little interest in Catholicism—but provides some compelling entertainment. The film imagines a prolonged encounter in Rome between the conservative Pope Benedict and Cardinal Bergoglio (the future Pope Francis). As Benedict (Anthony Hopkins) prepares to resign, he mulls over the question of his succession. Surprisingly, he hopes that the liberal Argentine (played by Jonathan Pryce) will be the next vicar of Christ on earth. The inter-papal dialogue has many surreal moments—they munch on pizzas, enjoy a football game and even practise tango steps. But there are also serious dimensions to the movie, including the moment when each makes a formal confession to the other of his worst failings. Cardinal Bergoglio recalls his inability to protect two radical Jesuits in Buenos Aires who, in the era of military rule, were abducted and tortured. Benedict also begins to make a confession, but his words cannot be heard. Viewers are left to understand that it concerns his failure to crack down on notorious abusers. If this silence has a message, it may be that certain things are too dreadful to articulate in an essentially playful film. In both the story (at least in outline) and real life, there is another subplot which concerns forgiveness. One of the two Jesuits who was tortured, Francisco Jalics, eventually had a reconciliation with the man who failed to protect him. The other, Orlando Yorio, apparently continued to blame him for their torture until his death. As this brings home, when one adult grievously wrongs another, the consequences are unpredictable. Some victims may find in their hearts the ability to forgive, others will not; it is possible to admire the forgivers without blaming the non-forgivers. But can an adult ever be expected to forgive the monster who abused the child he once was? That is a harder question. “Grâce à Dieu” successfully argues that the sort of forgiveness procedures advocated by the church can be a way of trivialising a scourge, and of minimising the damage to a self-serving institution. It makes a convincing case that forgiveness alone is no substitute for tough action to stamp out that scourge and to make its recurrence impossible. “Grâce à Dieu” (“By the Grace of God”) was released in France in February and in America and Britain in October. “The Two Popes” is released in select cinemas on November 27th and will be available on Netflix on December 20th