IT IS a decision that has been decades in the making. When it came, it surprised no one. On November 9th India’s supreme court granted Hindus possession of a site in the city of Ayodhya that is claimed as the birthplace of Rama, an incarnation of the god Vishnu. A 16th century mosque had stood on the 2.77 acre site until a fanatical mob demolished it in 1992, sparking a decade of sporadic nationwide violence that left several thousand dead, mostly minority Muslims. The court’s judgment orders India’s government to create a trust that may build a Hindu temple on the site, and also to provide land nearby for the building of a replacement mosque.Fears of renewed violence had prompted schools and offices to close across parts of northern India, amid security precautions that included massive police deployments, instructions to media to avoid incitement and a partial suspension of internet service. Politicians of all stripes, as well as spiritual leaders of both faiths, called for calm and acceptance of the court’s verdict. But simple exhaustion with the dispute, which has festered for nearly as long as India has been independent, may be the main reason for the generally muted public response.It helped, too, that the five judges on the Supreme Court bench ruled unanimously. Aside from offering five acres of land in compensation, their ruling gave solace to Muslims by terming the 1992 demolition of the mosque, known as the Babri Masjid, “an egregious violation of the rule of law”. This suggests that energy may now be injected into the separate criminal trial of Hindu nationalist leaders held responsible for provoking the mosque attack. This has lingered in lower courts for decades.Zafaryab Jilani, a lawyer for the Muslim plaintiffs, said they would respect the ruling, but were “not satisfied” and noted “several contradictions” in the judges’ logic. Some independent legal experts concur. “The court seems to set great store in a lack of documentary evidence that prayers were held in the mosque before 1857, yet finds no trouble in the lack of evidence that any Hindu services were held there, either,” says a lawyer who prefers to remain anonymous, due to the sensitivity of the case. Social-media commentary has been less forgiving. “Possession is nine-tenths of ownership, but demolition is the whole thing,” read one sarcastic tweet. “Realized today that ‘If you break it, you own it’ applies outside of retail as well!” read another.Despite such doubts, the majority of Hindus are broadly relieved that the saga has finally come to an end. Shekhar Gupta, an experienced and canny commentator, described the ruling as “wonderfully nuanced” and predicted it would bring closure to the issue. The opposition Congress party welcomed the court’s judgment. It not only opens the way for construction of a temple, said Randeep Surjewala, a party spokesman, but also prevents the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) and its Hindu chauvinist allies from seeking to capitalise on the issue any more.Perhaps, but for now prime minister Narendra Modi and his party are basking in satisfaction. The promise to build a giant temple at the purported site of Lord Rama’s birth has been a rallying cry for Hindu nationalists since the 1980s, and a fixture of the BJP’s election manifestos since 1996. Having won a second five-year term in May by a landslide, Mr Modi has fulfilled a string of promises to his Hindu nationalist base, including the splitting in two of Jammu & Kashmir, India’s only Muslim-majority state, and stripping it both of its special status under the constitution and of statehood.But will this triumphant end to the BJP’s long crusade now allow the prime minister to focus on more pressing issues, such as a faltering economy? And will it cool Hindu fervour enough to soothe communal relations, which have grown increasingly strained under Mr Modi? Some Hindu hardliners are already pushing for more, claiming that other mosques, and even perhaps the Taj Mahal, the famous tomb of a Muslim emperor and his wife, are built atop ancient temples. But the likelihood of galvanising a large chunk of Hindu opinion again is probably limited. The campaign to demolish and replace the Babri Masjid began 70 years ago with the surreptitious planting of a Hindu idol in 1949. And the ensuing lifetime of strife is not a price that many Indians will be willing to pay again. 