Below is a selection of The Economist’s coverage of migration policy, as well as other resources used in the production of the film “How to get migration right”. Many of the biggest political developments of the past decade—the election of Donald Trump, the rise of populism in Europe and the vote for Brexit—can be partially attributed to a fear of mass migration. Yet if borders were more open, the world’s economic output could roughly double. The simple act of moving to a richer country makes migrants more productive and helps to make their host countries more dynamic. See below for other benefits of migration and what countries could do to reap its many rewards.  How migration benefits the world Immigrants or their children founded 45% of America’s Fortune 500 companies, including Apple, Google and Levi Strauss. Globally migrants are three times more likely to file patents than non-migrants. Migration could generate trillions of dollars, which would benefit those who move, their host countries and the wider global economy, according to Michael Clemens of the Centre for Global Development. Special report: to make the world richer, let people moveThe Economist, November 14th 2019 World If: a world of free movement would be $78 trillion richerThe Economist, July 13th 2019 Economics and emigration: trillion-dollar bills on the sidewalk? Michael A. Clemens, Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2011Australia’s points-based system Australia’s points-based immigration system is widely regarded as successful because it balances openness to migrants with ruthless selectivity. Australia’s population has the highest share of migrants of all big members of the OECD, a club of mostly rich countries. Its ratio is double America’s. The Australian government tightly monitors its borders while still letting in a large number of people who ultimately benefit the Australian economy. How migration makes the world brainierThe Economist, November 14th 2019 The Australian points-based system: what is it and what would its impact be in the UK? Madeleine Sumption, The Migration Observatory, 2019 Unlikely new residents are reviving Australian country townsThe Economist, January 12th 2019 Australia takes in far more immigrants than other rich countries, with less frictionThe Economist, October 25th 2018 What the world can learn from AustraliaThe Economist, October 27th 2018 Employer-driven policies Although America is often seen as a country of migrants, its employer-driven system is flawed and outdated. Madeleine Sumption, director of the Migration Observatory, outlines the benefits and drawbacks of employer-driven systems.   America’s immigration system is brokenThe Economist, June 30th 2018 Rethinking points systems and employer-selected immigration Madeleine Sumption, The Migration Policy Institute, 2011 The way forward on migration There are understandable concerns that mass migration might undermine the institutions that make the rich world rich. To alleviate those concerns, policymakers need to make sure the host population is on board. This could include making changes to migration policies gradual so they do not alienate natives. Immigration sceptics will, of course, be hard to convince either way. But Australia’s example might inspire some governments to start opening their doors to more migrants gradually. Why the arguments against immigration are so popularThe Economist, November 14th 2019 Governments need better ways to manage migrationThe Economist, August 25th 2018 The way forward on immigration to the WestThe Economist, August 25th 2018 Open Future: how to convince sceptics of the value of immigration?The Economist, June 1st 2018