Below is a selection of The Economist’s coverage of Huawei as well as other resources used in the production of the film “Is America right to fear Huawei?”. HUAWEI, CHINA’S leading telecommunications company, is at the centre of a political controversy. Its products—from smartphones to solar panels—are sleek, high-tech and competitive with anything its rivals can produce. As a result, its revenues have soared (see chart). But the company’s ascent has caused a good deal of worry around the world, especially in relation to its operating networks.  The fight over Huawei The main source of animosity towards Huawei stems from its “fifth-generation” (5G) networks, one of the technologies in which the company is a global leader. Fears have been raised that its 5G gear may contain malicious code designed to let Chinese spies snoop. As a result, America barred firms from using Huawei equipment in May and has campaigned for its allies to do the same. America blacklists China’s best artificial-intelligence firmsThe Economist, October 10th 2019 How can Huawei sell sensitive tech in the absence of trust?The Economist, August 8th 2019 Huawei has been cut off from American technologyThe Economist, May 25th 2019 Huawei is at the centre of political controversyThe Economist, April 27th 2019 How to handle HuaweiThe Economist, January 31st 2019 In September The Economist's audio team sat down with Huawei's founder and CEO, Ren Zhengfei. In this exclusive interview Mr Ren outlines how he plans to sell Huawei’s 5G technology to the West. (Read the full transcript here.)   Why does 5G have everyone worried about Huawei? The Economist, December 7th 2018 Is 5G worth all the fuss? 5G promises to make browsing on the internet dramatically faster. To take just one example, users could transfer a high-resolution film in two seconds. But a lot of uncertainty still surrounds the development of the technology and the change it will bring. Watch an interview with Tim Cross, our technology editor, in which he dispels some of the myths around 5G.   How the world will change as computers spread into everyday objectsThe Economist, September 12th 2019 The trade war Huawei is also caught up in a much bigger conflict between America and China. For the past sixteen months the two superpowers have been locked in a trade war. They have been exchanging tit-for-tat tariffs on imported goods. But even when this trade war ends its effects will be felt for years to come. Trade can no longer anchor America’s relationship with China David Rennie, The Economist May 16th 2019 Big tech and the trade warThe Economist, May 23rd 2019 How the twists and turns of the trade war are hurting growthThe Economist, October 17th 2019 The trade war escalates, and the fog of war descendsThe Economist, August 8th 2019 Could a trade war derail global growth?The Economist, June 21st 2019 Trump’s Trade War Timeline: An Up-to-Date Guide Chad Brown and Melina Kold, Peterson Institute for International Economics, September 20th 2019