THE PRICE war swift and brutal. Less than eight weeks ago, on October 1st, Charles Schwab declared that it would no longer charge retail customers for trading shares, exchange-traded funds or options online, forgoing $4.95 a trade. The share price of America’s biggest discount broker dropped by nearly a tenth. That of its nearest rival, TD Ameritrade, suffered more, plunging by a quarter (see chart). TD Ameritrade followed suit in eliminating commissions two days later. It had little choice, even though it reckoned doing so would cut its revenue by $220m-240m a quarter, or 15-16%. On November 25th came a truce, and surrender: Schwab agreed to buy TD Ameritrade for $26bn in shares. The deal combines Schwab’s 12.1m brokerage accounts with TD Ameritrade’s 12m. It will unite two platforms used by independent financial advisers—7,500 on Schwab’s, 7,000 on TD Ameritrade’s—for trading, market information and regulatory updates. The takeover will also solve a succession problem at TD Ameritrade, whose chief executive, Tim Hockey, had said in July he would stand down next year. (Stephen Boyle, the chief financial officer, is taking over for the time being; presumably he will make way for Charles Schwab’s boss, Walt Bettinger.)  Investors in both companies will be delighted, or at least relieved. On November 21st, when it was first reported that a deal was imminent, TD Ameritrade’s shares jumped by almost 17% and Schwab’s by 7.3%. Yet the takeover is as much a sign of the strains on Schwab—and on TD Ameritrade and their smaller rival, E*Trade—as a demonstration of its market clout. Once disruptors of the broking business, they are themselves at risk of disruption. Founded in 1971, Schwab became a thorn in the sides of established stockbrokers after America’s regulators abolished fixed commissions in 1975. Ameritrade was founded that year, to fight the same battle. In the 1990s, by then joined by E*Trade, the upstarts ventured online. Ameritrade joined forces with TD Waterhouse, the discount-broking arm of Canada’s Toronto-Dominion Bank, in 2006. (Toronto-Dominion Bank, which still owns 43% of TD Ameritrade, will have 13% of the enlarged Schwab; other TD Ameritrade shareholders will have 18%.) But in recent years digital technology has enabled an even cheaper, wholly digital, discount-broking model. The most prominent digi-challenger is Robinhood, a six-year-old Silicon Valley startup, which boasts 6m clients and charges nothing for trades. It makes money from payments from marketmakers to whom it sends trades for execution, interest from uninvested cash in clients’ accounts, charging for premium services and lending stocks on margin. It has also applied for a banking licence. Faced with a competitor providing trades for nothing, Schwab could not go on charging $4.95 a pop. Still less could TD Ameritrade keep asking $6.95. Admittedly, both have more strings to their bows than simple execution. They have their adviser platforms; they hold a combined $5trn-plus in client assets; Schwab owns a bank with $208bn in assets. No one expects the combined firm to start charging again for online trades: free trading online is probably here to stay. But to stay competitive, the established discount brokers will have to drive costs down, spread those costs over as big and broad a base as possible and spend even more on ever-fancier technology. Christopher Harris, an analyst at Wells Fargo, estimates that in past takeovers of discount brokers, cost savings have amounted to 50% of the target’s expense base. Schwab and TD Ameritrade expect to save $1.8bn-2bn a year, about two-thirds of TD Ameritrade’s operating costs (and 18-20% of their combined cost base). Schwab lists more than 370 branches on its website, and TD Ameritrade more than 280; presumably, many will be closed. As in other areas of finance—retail banking, say, or securities trading on Wall Street—the biggest are likeliest to endure. They can afford to spend oodles on technology and to maintain branches as a national branding presence. And when margins are wafer-thin, volume is king. The importance of scale may help to explain why E*Trade’s share price fell by more than 9% on November 21st, the day markets anticipated the deal. It had also been buoyed by a takeover premium; now E*Trade looks a little lonely. America’s antitrust authorities look sure to scrutinise a deal between the country’s two biggest discount brokers. Whether they block it, says Matthias Memminger of Bain, a consulting firm, is less sure. Americans have plenty of choice in how they buy and sell shares. They can invest, for example, using Fidelity or Vanguard, two mighty asset-managers that push their own funds, or through their tied advisers. Banks’ broking divisions are also keen for their custom. And Schwab and TD Ameritrade will doubtless argue that they have fintechs to look out for too. If they didn’t, they’d have less urge to merge.