ON NOVEMBER 13th America’s Democratic-controlled House of Representatives began public hearings that will probably lead to the impeachment of President Donald Trump. Mr Trump will surely survive a trial in the Republican-controlled Senate, unless public opinion swings against him. That is possible but unlikely. Though not wholly insulated from events—it sagged when Republicans tried to repeal Obamacare—Mr Trump’s approval rating moves in a narrower range than those of past presidents: his critics loathe him and his base loves him, come what may. It has slid by just two points since Democrats’ impeachment inquiries began in September.  With Britain’s general election less than a month away, both main parties are promising to lavish cash on the National Health Service. Boris Johnson has been eagerly visiting hospitals and pledging to build more. This week Labour announced an “NHS rescue plan”, outbidding the Conservatives’ proposed funding increase. The NHS is under strain. This week data showed that 16% of people are waiting more than four hours to be seen in hospital emergency departments, a record. The doctors’ union says that the NHS is facing its worst-ever winter crisis. As our special report on migration this week notes, in most rich countries immigration is political gelignite. Fear of immigration has infected poorer countries too. Yet Michael Clemens, an American development economist, estimates that if everyone who wanted to migrate could do so, global GDP would double. Migrants themselves are the biggest beneficiaries, but as our leader argues, the benefits to host countries are also hefty. Objections to migration can be overcome, if (among other things) political leaders control their borders and ensure migrants pay their way. On November 12th Disney launched a television-streaming service, Disney+. Selling content directly to viewers, rather than through cinemas and TV channels, is a radical departure for the 96-year-old company, but the entertainment industry has decided that the old model is no longer viable. The field of streams is already crowded, as Apple, AT&T and others take on Netflix and Amazon Prime Video. Blockbuster sums are at stake: $650bn has been spent on acquisitions and programming in the past five years. Our cover leader argues that a shake-out is inevitable. When it comes, the state will have to ensure the market stays open and vibrant. Alibaba has transformed China’s annual Singles’ Day into the world’s biggest shopping frenzy, far outstripping America’s post-Thanksgiving bingefests, Black Friday and Cyber Monday. On November 11th (the date comprises four lonely 1s) the mighty e-commerce company shifted $38.4bn-worth of merchandise. In 2013 it took 367 seconds to ring up sales of 1bn yuan (then $164m). This year it took a mere 14.