“HENRY V” HAS for centuries been a patriotic comfort blanket, something to be wrapped around Britain’s shoulders in periods of anxiety and doubt. William Shakespeare’s play was first performed in 1599, in the final years of Elizabeth I’s reign, as the childless queen refused to name a successor. Laurence Olivier’s film adaptation was released in 1944, amid the final bloody period of the second world war. Released in cinemas shortly before the Normandy landings, the film sought to inspire and rally the nation with the victory of Agincourt. Kenneth Branagh’s version arrived in 1989, as Margaret Thatcher’s premiership came to an end; one critic observed that the film had “the guilty aftertaste of victory in the Falklands”. Thirty years later, as the United Kingdom grapples with Brexit, there could not be a more fitting time for a new incarnation of Hal, the medieval warrior prince. Yet anyone hoping for a dewy-eyed recreation of former glories—and the usual jibes at the French—will be disappointed. David Michôd, an Australian director, has made a career of examining the more malign uses of power, whether in a criminal family (“Animal Kingdom”) or the American armed forces (“War Machine”). A loose adaptation of the Henriad—“Henry IV” parts one and two and “Henry V”—his new film uses Shakespeare as a template, while ditching the iambic pentameter and lengthy monologues.  Timothée Chalamet plays the English prince as a beautiful melancholy youth, whose withdrawal from court is prompted more by his political alienation from his war-mongering father, Henry IV (a louche Ben Mendelsohn), than pure hedonism. Hal’s pacifism is partly inspired by Falstaff (reimagined by Joel Edgerton, who also co-wrote the screenplay with Mr Michôd), a sombre veteran of various wars, who drinks to forget past trauma. Despite his reluctance, Henry V ascends the throne and is forced to face a hostile France and courtiers counselling war as a panacea for civil discord. In the Henriad, Shakespeare elevated Hal from ne’er-do-well to a paragon of a leader. But in “The King” he goes in the opposite direction, starting off as an idealist only to be compromised by the power he must wield. Whether he is witnessing the execution of his traitorous friends or rushing into the field of Agincourt, Mr Chalamet plays a leader whose heart simply isn’t in it. His eyes are as dead as Michael Corleone’s in “The Godfather: Part Two” as he betrays his former beliefs and moves ever closer to despotism. Before he gives his battle oration, his advisers suggest that he give the soldiers “a beautiful lie”. The Agincourt battle remains the climax of the film, and Mr Michôd delivers a thrilling mix of mud and blood. But it is the duplicity in the cause of nationhood that makes “The King” feel so vital and challenging. Going to war on the basis of falsehoods calls forth the run-up to the second Iraq war, but “The King” goes further in suggesting that power is always based on lies. Henry V may be the poster boy for proud English triumph, but the paper is thin. “The King” is streaming on Netflix now