ON NOVEMBER 8TH a much-loved album will be reissued in a lavish multi-format edition. Often such releases are an opportunity for the music industry to squeeze yet further revenue out of a bestseller by a famous name. But in the case of “No Other”, an album released in 1974 by Gene Clark, it is a labour of love, not a cash-in. Behind the reissue is not a major record company but 4AD, a veteran British independent label known for championing art-pop and experimental acts. It is likely that many readers will never have heard of the record, and may well wonder who Clark is. “No Other” is the epitome of a cult album: relatively few people know of it, but almost everybody who does adores it. It is not merely a “great lost album” —it is one of the finest albums ever recorded. It fuses country, psychedelia, baroque pop, gospel, folk, soul, funk and chamber pop with an ambitious majesty. It offers a set of extraordinarily poetic and beautiful songs.  Opulently recorded—its production costs exceeded $100,000, a vast expense at the time—“No Other” was released by Asylum, a record label home to nearly all the biggest and hippest folk-rock, country-rock and singer-songwriter acts of the day. The stars seemed to be aligned in its favour, but “No Other” divided critics and eluded the public. Asylum all but disowned the album, failing to promote it, and soon afterwards deleting it from its catalogue. It would remain unavailable for many years to come, circulating like samizdat on cassette copies passed from one Americana enthusiast to another. Its reputation grew slowly into reverence. By 2014 an indie supergroup led by members of Beach House, a dream-pop duo, was touring a live version to introduce it to new listeners. Clark was born in rural Missouri in 1944, one of 13 siblings. He showed a remarkable talent as a singer and guitarist, and was adept enough to make a career of music in his teens. He moved to Los Angeles and between 1964 and 1966 became—for the first and last time in his life—a bona fide rock’n’roll star. He was a founding member and the principal songwriter of the Byrds (pictured), who merged their twin loves of folk music and the Beatles into a new hit sound. His bandmates may have shaken their heads at his turbulent love life, but they eagerly welcomed the tunes that resulted. (They were less enthusiastic about getting by on frugal stipends while he bought sports cars with his royalties.) Leaving the group over personal and musical conflicts, he bequeathed them their defining song, “Eight Miles High”, a psychedelic tour de force which he had co-written with two fellow band members. The Byrds’ own label, Columbia, signed Clark as a solo artist; then—in a move that typified the wretched luck and terrible timing that would dog his career—it released his excellent, innovative debut album, “Gene Clark With The Gosdin Brothers”, in the same week as a new Byrds LP, “Younger Than Yesterday”. Overshadowed, it flopped. He would never have a solo commercial success, his only moments back in the brighter lights involving reunions with members of the Byrds. Yet Clark made wonderful records which prefigured the successes of others, and they add up to a first-rate catalogue. In 1968 he teamed up with Doug Dillard, a banjo player, for two albums as Dillard & Clark, anticipating the country-rock sound with which the duo’s guitarist, Bernie Leadon, would triumph as a member of the Eagles. The plaintive, spare “White Light” (1971, a.k.a. “Gene Clark”) is a superb album which merits a central place in the singer-songwriter canon. Within a year of the release of “No Other”, Fleetwood Mac’s definitive line-up would assemble and embark on a blockbuster series of records that drew on many of the same ideas. Even when trying to make slick, radio-friendly rock in 1984 on “Firebyrd” (a.k.a. “This Byrd Has Flown”), Clark was a thrilling, soulful singer and a masterful writer. His last studio album, “So Rebellious A Lover” (1987, with Carla Olsen), foreshadowed the alt-country movement then gathering in America. Already erratic in temperament, and prone to substance abuse, Clark never recovered psychologically from the disastrous fate of “No Other”. He died, aged only 46, in 1991 after a two-year binge paid for with the royalties from a Tom Petty cover of his song “I’ll Feel a Whole Lot Better”. Ironies abound in his story. But it is defined, in the end, by his music, which becomes ever more appreciated.