MOVE FAST and break things was Mark Zuckerberg’s motto in the early days of Facebook. The imperative was to create a market before the competition did so. That meant getting a product to customers, even in imperfect form, on the grounds that it could always be improved later. The “move fast” part is linked to the concept of “upscaling” or “blitzscaling”—the idea that many markets are natural monopolies where the secret is to exploit network effects. People join Facebook because all their friends are on Facebook. And the “break things” element relates to the way this strategy was used by startups which wanted to disrupt an existing market: Uber and the taxi sector are an obvious example. Since Boris Johnson became Britain’s prime minister, appointing Dominic Cummings as his adviser, his Conservative Party has seemed to follow a “move fast and break things” strategy. It has tried to push the pace of the country’s departure from the EU, insisting on the date of October 31st, “do or die”. It has tossed out a lot of policy proposals, including tax cuts and public-spending pledges, not in a fully costed or thought-out form, but as a way of getting out ahead of the Labour opposition. And it has broken many things, including Britain’s unwritten constitution and the tradition of a broad-church Conservative Party. Many moderate MPs have been expelled or have decided to stand down.  Of course, the analogy is not perfect. The Conservative Party is not a startup but was founded in the 1830s and has roots (as the Tories) dating back to the 17th century. But in management terms, one can view the party as a troubled brand which turned to new management (in the form of Mr Johnson and Mr Cummings) to turn around its fortunes. In May’s European elections, the Conservatives received just a 9% share of the vote, finishing fifth in the party race. Much of its vote was lost to the Brexit Party which claimed 32% of the poll. So the Conservatives reacted as many a technology titan has done; by attempting a takeover of the upstart group. Of course, it can be argued that this is really a reverse takeover; that people from the Brexit Party have taken over the Conservatives. But when a corporate merger takes place, the trick is to see which group dominates the top executive positions. The leaders of the party were all previous Conservative MPs, albeit from the Eurosceptic wing. A disruptive approach was, in management terms, necessary to change the brand of the Conservative Party away from the cautious, rather dour, image it had suffered under Theresa May. Only by bold action could the Conservatives take the anti-establishment vote away from the Brexit Party. All the pronouncements about doing or dying, about resisting Parliament and the courts, were designed to achieve this end. In narrow terms, the approach seems to have worked. The Brexit Party’s share of the vote has declined sharply and it may struggle to win any seats at the coming general election. The Conservatives have a double-digit lead over Labour in many polls. The nagging question, however, is one of authenticity. The Conservative brand is associated with the elite and the establishment. Its current leaders, like Mr Johnson and Jacob Rees-Mogg, were educated at Eton (Britain’s best-known private school) and Oxbridge. It is also hard to run an anti-establishment campaign when you have been in power for nine years. The party’s campaign slogan, “Britain deserves better”, is a double-edged one. Worst of all, the Tories did not live up to their promise; Britain did not leave the EU by October 31st. Indeed the Conservatives may have decided to “move fast” towards a general election because they know their anti-elitist image cannot be sustained for long. It is too early to tell whether their relaunch will turn into the next Airbnb or just another WeWork, a case of hype springs eternal.