From trade wars to populism, causes of economic uncertainty abound on both sides of the Atlantic. And yet, as we note this week, calm has descended on the euro-dollar exchange rate. The volatility implied by the cost of currency options recently fell below the levels of the serene pre-crisis days of 2007. Monetary policy provides one explanation: worries about low growth have caused both the Federal Reserve and the European Central Bank to cut interest rates, which markets expect to stay low. And fears about the euro zone’s break-up have long dissipated. So, still waters. For now.  In its election manifesto, published this week, Britain’s Labour Party promises, besides higher taxes for the rich and vastly increased public spending, to nationalise parts of BT, formerly a state-owned telecoms monopoly, and to provide free fibre-optic broadband for all. Britain is a laggard in fibre, which allows much higher speeds than copper wires. But its broadband is far from awful. Ultra-fast connections are rare but so are truly sluggish ones. Talk of nationalisation may anyway be moot: our reporting suggests Labour may lose traditional strongholds to the governing Conservatives in next month’s poll. Banks have long been under assault from eager “fintech” upstarts. Now the adversaries that both sides fear more than the other, big technology companies, at last look serious about getting into finance. So far they have made only limited inroads, at least in most Western countries. But each of the GAFA quartet (Google, Amazon, Facebook, Apple) is making moves. Most recently, Google has said it will start offering current (checking) accounts in America next year. Why do freewheeling techies want to get into such a heavily regulated industry? They probably don’t want to be banks, but they surely do want your data. On November 18th Mike Pompeo, America’s secretary of state, said that Israeli settlements in the West Bank were in line with international law. That is consistent with other gestures by President Donald Trump’s administration favouring Israel, but not with the international consensus that the settlements, in territories Israel captured in a war with Arab states in 1967, are illegal. Some 428,000 Israeli settlers are estimated to live in the West Bank, alongside 2.6m Palestinians. Our leader this week argues that America’s decision makes peace less likely, and that Mr Trump has hemmed in whoever leads Israel next. Who that will be remains unclear. Israeli politics remains gridlocked, after two inconclusive elections. The prime minister, Binyamin Netanyahu, has been charged with bribery and fraud. The illegal drugs industry is booming again. Having fallen during the global financial crisis, production of hard drugs is as high as ever. Colombia’s coca crop has increased since the FARC, a Marxist insurgency, disbanded, as traffickers have moved into its territory. Opium has flourished in Afghanistan since most NATO forces pulled out in 2014. Africa is probably suffering most, as a conduit for drugs from both Latin America and Central Asia. Several countries in the continent are afflicted, but Guinea-Bissau, on the Atlantic, perhaps worst of all. In one recent haul police found enough cocaine to cut 100m lines.