RHINOCEROS HORNS are big business. Traditional Chinese medicine uses them to treat rheumatism and gout, even though they have no actual pharmaceutical properties beyond placebo. And Yemeni craftsmen carve them into dagger handles. A kilogram of rhino horn can thus command as much as $60,000, so there is tremendous incentive for poachers to hunt the animals. Since almost all rhinoceros populations are endangered, several critically, this is a serious problem. Some conservationists therefore suggest that a way to reduce pressure on the animals might be to flood the market with fakes. This, they hope, would reduce the value of real horns and thus the incentive to hunt rhinos in the first place. That would require the fakes to be good ones. But Fritz Vollrath, a zoologist at Oxford University, reckons his skills as a forger are up to the challenge. As he writes in Scientific Reports, he and his colleagues from Fudan University, in Shanghai, have come up with a cheap and easy-to-make knock-off that is strikingly similar to the real thing.  The main ingredient of Dr Vollrath’s forged horns is horsehair. Despite their differing appearances, horses and rhinos are reasonably closely related. Horses do not have horns, of course. But, technically, neither do rhinos. Unlike the structures that adorn cattle and bison, which have cores made of bone, the “horns” of rhinoceros are composed of hairs bound tightly together by a mixture of dead cells. Examination under a microscope showed that hairs collected from horses’ tails had similar dimensions and symmetry to those found in the horns of rhinos. They also shared a spongy core structure. The only thing that set the two apart was a scaly layer on the horse hairs that was absent from those of the rhino. This, the researchers were able to strip this away by bathing their horse hairs in a solution of lithium bromide. The next task they tackled was making a suitable binding matrix. Unable to produce a solution of richly melanised rhinoceros cells, Dr Vollrath and his coauthor Mi Ruixin worked with a fibrous protein-rich glue of the sort produced naturally by spiders and silkworms. They bundled the treated horse hairs as tightly as they could in a matrix of this glue, and then left the bundles in an oven to dry. Small artificial horns cured this way in a matter of days. Larger ones took a few weeks. The result was a material that, with some polishing, looked identical to rhino horn. Yet, the researchers knew that tricking the naked eye would not be enough. Specimens on the black market are inspected carefully before sale, so for the false horns to be effective they would need to stand up to close scrutiny. To this end, Dr Vollrath and Dr Mi decided to test their product in greater detail. First, they tried to discern, using a scanning electron microscope, the difference between fake horn and the real thing. They couldn’t. Next, they employed a technique that compared the quantity of heat needed to increase the temperature of samples by a particular amount. Again, the false horn behaved in a way almost identical to the real. Finally, they stressed or strained, and then relaxed, samples for long periods, to probe their underlying physical properties. The results for real and false horn were indistinguishable. DNA analysis would certainly reveal fakes, but such tests are complicated and therefore hard to conduct in the sorts of back rooms in which rhino-horn sales tend to take place. Moreover, since the horn trade is illegal, there is no official body, as exists in things like the diamond market, to authenticate goods before they are sold. Whether using clandestine means to launch impeccable fakes onto the rhinoceros-horn market would truly reduce prices and sabotage demand remains to be tested. But it might. It is an old trick in warfare to flood the enemy with forged, worthless money. Something similar may yet help to save the rhino.