In a candid interview with The Economist this week, Emmanuel Macron, the president of France, warns that Europe is “on the edge of a precipice”. With America turning its back, China rising and authoritarian leaders on the EU’s doorstep, the result is the “exceptional fragility of Europe”. A particular worry is that “we are currently experiencing...the brain death of NATO”. He believes that the European Union will have to do more to defend itself. Polls suggest that Mr Macron’s compatriots agree. But most European NATO members, including France, spend less on defence than the 2% of GDP they have promised to disburse by 2024 under NATO’s target. Closing the gap means they must find another $102bn. (You can read a transcript of the interview here.)  On November 6th SoftBank, an enormous Japanese telecoms and technology conglomerate, announced a $6bn quarterly loss, largely reflecting a write-down of its stake in WeWork, a loss-making office-rental firm. Its boss, Masayoshi Son, believes that SoftBank has a valuable array of tech assets that outsiders don’t appreciate. But SoftBank’s underlying weakness, argues our Schumpeter column, is a lack of cashflow. Although it has clocked up $43bn in profit in the past five years, it has also burned $2bn of free cashflow. Taiwan’s Democratic Progressive Party does not even pay lip service to the official pretence that the island is part of China. So when the DPP’s Tsai Ing-wen became president in 2016, China cut the flow of tourists from the mainland and called off high-level contacts. But on November 4th China announced 26 measures to strengthen economic ties—eg, allowing Taiwanese firms to invest in 5G mobile networks. China is not as alluring for Taiwanese firms as it once was. Since 2010 its share of Taiwan’s “foreign” investment has fallen from 84% to 34%. Next year, a gay male couple in California will choose an embryo to be implanted in a surrogate mother. With a company called Genomic Prediction, they will make their pick according to a genetically estimated risk of disease. Genomic Prediction screens embryos for 1m single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)—tiny variations in individuals’ DNA that, added together, can raise or lower the likelihood of suffering a particular disease. SNP profiling may also provide a way to upgrade other things, such as height or (more controversially) intelligence. The technology looks on balance beneficial, but it may be wise to debate it. In election campaigns in both America and Britain, left-wing politicians have been bashing billionaires. Nothing new there. More novel is the left’s charge that vast personal fortunes can be made only when government policy goes wrong. There is a kernel of truth in that. We estimate that one-fifth of America’s billionaires made their money in industries in which government capture or market failure is common. But many other plutocrats have become rich in competitive markets. By all means correct policy failures and attack rent-seeking, our leader argues. That would achieve far more than an indiscriminate attack on the rich.