ON SEPTEMBER 11th 2001, Shane Parrish was just two weeks into his job at a Canadian intelligence agency, armed with a computer-science degree and thrust into new responsibilities. Forced to make important decisions, he became captivated with the process of how decisions themselves are made. This inquiry led him first to business school and then to create Farnam Street, a website that focuses on the idea of “mental models.” The company’s name is taken from the street address in Omaha, Nebraska, of Berkshire Hathaway, the successful investment firm run by Warren Buffett and Charlie Munger, who has long championed developing “a latticework of models in your head.” The idea is that people need a range of different ways to deliberately look at problems in order to make the best decisions in a given circumstance. It is a theme that Mr Parrish explores in a recent book, “The Great Mental Models” (Latticework Publishing, 2019).  We asked Mr Parrish to apply this thinking about mental models to contemporary problems such as responding to climate change and political polarisation. His answers are below, followed by a book excerpt on second-order effects (including the possibly-apocryphal story of cobras in India during British colonial rule). *** The Economist: What are "mental models" and how do they work? Shane Parrish: Mental models are how we explain the world to ourselves. Compounding, for instance, is a mental model that helps us understand how things grow non-linearly. Supply and demand helps us understand why some things cost more than others. Typically, we apply these models only in the field in which we learn them, which limits their use. Money isn’t the only thing that compounds, so do relationships. While no model perfectly explains reality, that doesn’t mean they’re not useful. We use models all the time to draw lessons from our past experiences, match patterns, and reason through problems. This is how we make sense of the world. The accuracy, breadth and applicability of the models at our disposal defines the quality of our thinking and the actions we take. The more we specialise in a given field, the more likely we think the models of that field explain everything. As the old proverb says, “If all you have is a hammer, everything looks like a nail.” Broadly speaking, the more models we understand, the more likely we are to avoid gaps in our thinking. You can think of mental models as our cognitive tools. We don’t rise to the level of our hopes. We fall to the level of our thinking. The Economist: One can see how mental models may work in business, but how could the idea be applied to societal issues like responding to climate change? Mr Parrish: Decision-makers and private citizens alike should have the best mental tools available to inform how they think and act. Part of the problem with climate change is that it doesn’t affect most of us on a day-to-day basis, so collective action is hard. One model that helps us understand the situation better is second-order thinking, where we consider the second and subsequent effects of our actions or inactions. Some actions are first-order negative and second-order positive. Generally, these are hard for people to take because they involve trading “pain today” for “gain tomorrow”. In a world that often wants something for nothing, this can be a tough pill to swallow. And yet, when we go to the gym or avoid that afternoon cookie, we’re doing something today for a better tomorrow. Many climate-change advocates have embraced this model to help the public and corporations reason through the problem. Helping people see the hidden cost of inaction allows them to naturally move toward better solutions, including ones that are first-order negative for them individually while second-order positive for everyone. Of course, this is just one of many models that help us think through something as complicated as climate change. The Economist: Many societies are riven, with Britain's Brexit and America's Trump being just the most visible examples. How could new mental models be a part of the solution to political polarisation and the lack of civic unity? Is it realistic? Mr Parrish: Mental models help us understand others’ perspectives and think through problems but they don’t tell us what to think. Too often we’re eager to rush in and tell others what we think without trying to first understand how they see the world. While we might try to convince ourselves that we’re listening, it’s hard not to fall into the trap of listening to refute or reply. We are the hero of our own story. That’s why it’s so easy to think “they just don’t get it.” Instead of conversations we’re having monologues. We twist what people say to fit our worldview without trying to understand what the world looks like to someone else. When we understand how someone sees the world, a lot of their actions and beliefs start to make sense. The medical profession offers a helpful model. Would you think highly of a doctor that offered a diagnosis without first understanding your symptoms? The Economist: Doubters may say that finding a cerebral solution like “mental models” to a problem like political atomisaton is just a conceit of intellectual snowflakes. How would you respond? Mr Parrish: Improving our knowledge of the world has gotten us pretty far, I’d say. At our best, thinking through problems gives us more optimal solutions, while helping us be more empathetic, patient and respectful of others. *** Second-order thinking Excerpt from “The Great Mental Models: General thinking concepts,” by Shane Parrish and Rhiannon Beaubien (Latticework Publishing, 2019) In life and business, the person with the fewest blind spots wins. Removing blind spots means we see, interact with, and move closer to understanding reality. We think better. And thinking better is about finding simple processes that help us work through problems from multiple dimensions and perspectives, allowing us to better choose solutions that fit what matters to us. The skill for finding the right solutions for the right problems is one form of wisdom. […] Decisions based on improved understanding will be better than ones based on ignorance. While we can’t predict which problems will inevitably crop up in life, we can learn time-tested ideas that help us prepare for whatever the world throws at us. […] This often comes down to understanding a problem accurately and seeing the secondary and subsequent consequences of any proposed action. The author and explorer of mental models, Peter Bevelin, put it best: “I don’t want to be a great problem solver. I want to avoid problems—prevent them from happening and doing it right from the beginning.” How can we do things right from the beginning? We must understand how the world works and adjust our behavior accordingly. Contrary to what we’re led to believe, thinking better isn’t about being a genius. It is about the processes we use to uncover reality and the choices we make once we do. […] Not only do we understand the immediate problem with more accuracy, but we can begin to see the second-, third-, and higher-order consequences. This understanding helps us eliminate avoidable errors. Sometimes making good decisions boils down to avoiding bad ones. […] Almost everyone can anticipate the immediate results of their actions. This type of first-order thinking is easy and safe but it’s also a way to ensure you get the same results that everyone else gets. Second-order thinking is thinking farther ahead and thinking holistically. It requires us to not only consider our actions and their immediate consequences, but the subsequent effects of those actions as well. Failing to consider the second- and third-order effects can unleash disaster. It is often easier to find examples of when second-order thinking didn’t happen—when people did not consider the effects of the effects. When they tried to do something good, or even just benign, and instead brought calamity, we can safely assume the negative outcomes weren’t factored into the original thinking. Very often, the second level of effects is not considered until it’s too late. This concept is often referred to as the “Law of Unintended Consequences” for this very reason. We see examples of this throughout history. During their colonial rule of India, the British government began to worry about the number of venomous cobras in Delhi. To reduce the numbers, they instituted a reward for every dead snake brought to officials. In response, Indian citizens dutifully complied and began breeding the snakes to slaughter and bring to officials. The snake problem was worse than when it started because the British officials didn’t think at the second level. Second-order effects occur even with something simple like adding traction on tires: it seems like such a great idea because the more you have the less likely you are to slide, the faster you can stop, and thus the safer you are. However, the second-order effects are that your engine has to work harder to propel the car, you get worse gas mileage (releasing more detrimental carbon dioxide into the atmosphere), and you leave more rubber particles on the road. This is why any comprehensive thought process considers the effects of the effects as seriously as possible. You are going to have to deal with them anyway. The genie never gets back in the bottle. You can never delete consequences to arrive at the original starting conditions. In an example of second-order thinking deficiency, we have been feeding antibiotics to livestock for decades to make the meat safer and cheaper. Only in recent years have we begun to realize that in doing so we have helped create bacteria that we cannot defend against. In 1963, the UC Santa Barbara ecologist and economist Garrett Hardin proposed his First Law of Ecology: “You can never merely do one thing.” We operate in a world of multiple, overlapping connections, like a web, with many significant, yet obscure and unpredictable, relationships. He developed second-order thinking into a tool, showing that if you don’t consider “the effects of the effects,” you can’t really claim to be doing any thinking at all. When it comes to the overuse of antibiotics in meat, the first-order consequence is that the animals gain more weight per pound of food consumed, and thus there is profit for the farmer. Animals are sold by weight, so the less food you have to use to bulk them up, the more money you will make when you go to sell them. The second-order effects, however, have many serious, negative consequences. The bacteria that survive this continued antibiotic exposure are antibiotic resistant. That means that the agricultural industry, when using these antibiotics as bulking agents, is allowing mass numbers of drug-resistant bacteria to become part of our food chain. High degrees of connections make second-order thinking all the more critical, because denser webs of relationships make it easier for actions to have far-reaching consequences. You may be focused in one direction, not recognizing that the consequences are rippling out all around you. Things are not produced and consumed in a vacuum. Second-order thinking is not a way to predict the future. You are only able to think of the likely consequences based on the information available to you. However, this is not an excuse to power ahead and wait for post-facto scientific analysis. Could these consequences of putting antibiotics in the feed of all animals have been anticipated? Likely, yes, by anyone with even a limited understanding of biology. We know that organisms evolve. They adapt based on environmental pressures, and those with shorter life cycles can do it quite quickly because they have more opportunities. Antibiotics, by definition, kill bacteria. Bacteria, just like all other living things, want to survive. The pressures put on them by continued exposure to antibiotics increase their pace of evolution. Over the course of many generations, eventually mutations will occur that allow certain bacteria to resist the effects of the antibiotics. These are the ones that will reproduce more rapidly, creating the situation we are now in. From “The Great Mental Models: General thinking concepts,” by Shane Parrish and Rhiannon Beaubien. Reproduced with permission of Latticework Publishing.