THE PETERBOROUGH by-election on June 6th has failed to cause the political earthquake that many were expecting. Lisa Forbes held onto the seat for the Labour Party, beating the Brexit Party party’s candidate, Mike Greene, into second place. The party’s leader, Nigel Farage, who briefly made an appearance at the count, retreated with his tail between his legs and a question mark hanging over his political project. The Brexit Party was registered only four months ago, born out of frustration that Britain has so far missed all its deadlines to leave the European Union. After a stunning victory in the European elections on May 23rd, winning almost one third of the popular vote, many were predicting a win for the upstarts in Peterborough. But if the Brexit Party cannot win a seat in a constituency that voted 61% for Leave in the referendum of 2016, and that had just booted out its sitting MP for criminal activity, when will it be able to win its first seat at Westminster? The Liberal Democrats failed to repeat their impressive performance in last month’s European elections and managed to come only fourth.  The by-election was a triumph of old-style political loyalties. Many psephologists have taken to arguing that Leave and Remain are beginning to trump left and right as the lodestars of political loyalty. But Labour succeeded in keeping the seat, despite both the criminal antics of its previous MP (Fiona Onasanya had conspired with her brother-in-law to claim that he was driving her car in order to save her from getting points on her licence), and efforts by two challenging parties, the Brexit Party and the Liberal Democrats, to seduce its Leave and Remain supporters respectively. The by-election was also a triumph of old-fashioned shoe-leather politics. The Labour Party demonstrated that it is still a master of traditional get-out-the-vote politics: targeting likely voters, knocking on doors, demonstrating command of local issues, mixing national stars such as Angela Rayner with local activists and, above all, getting supporters to the polls on election day. The Brexit Party showed that its mastery of the new politics of social media and cultural polarisation that served it so well in the European elections (where people are voting for lists of candidates in giant constituencies) doesn’t translate into Westminster politics (where people are voting for particular MPs). Though Mr Farage promised that “we will be back”, his chances of winning Peterborough in a general election, where turn-out is routinely higher than yesterday’s 48%, will be slim unless he can build an old-fashioned political machine of local activists. There is a big difference between running a political party and running a glorified pressure group. For all that it was a close-run thing. The Labour Party poured massive national resources into the constituency, something that it wouldn’t be able to replicate in a general election. Even so, it managed to defeat the Brexit Party by only 638 votes, and saw its own share of the vote share fall by 17 percentage points from the 2017 general election. Given the dismal state of Britain’s Conservative government, with Brexit undelivered and the party engaged in a bloody leadership contest, this is hardly a ringing endorsement of Jeremy Corbyn’s leadership. The two biggest losers from the by-election were arguably the Conservative Party and the People’s Vote campaign. The Conservatives came a dismal third—the first time the party has failed to come in the top two in Peterborough since the introduction of the universal franchise in 1918—and saw its vote share fall by 25 percentage points from the last general election. This is perhaps a fitting political epitaph for Theresa May, who steps down as leader of the party on June 7th after three years characterised by a toxic combination of hubris, dithering and poor judgment. The party’s poor performance will reinforce the conviction that it has to push Brexit through, or see the Brexit Party syphon off many of its natural supporters, split the right-wing vote and put Mr Corbyn in Downing Street. The chairman of the Peterborough Conservative Association, Wayne Fitzgerald, said the result proved it was essential that the party commit to taking Britain out of the EU, even if it means doing so with no deal. (It is notable that, taken together, the Conservative and Brexit parties took 50% of the vote, to Labour’s 31%.) The People’s Vote campaign has been putting enormous pressure on Mr Corbyn to make Labour a Remain party that campaigns vigorously for a second referendum. But the fact that Labour has held a seat in a Leave-voting constituency against strong pressure from the Brexit Party will vindicate Mr Corbyn’s strategy of fudging on Brexit and fighting the war on Labour’s strongest fronts, public services and economic justice. Remainers may celebrate the fact that Mr Farage’s forces were defeated. But the result will also make both main parties more anxious to press on with getting Brexit out of the way.