BEFORE THE tear gas and the rubber bullets, there was music. At the protests in Hong Kong over the past week, people have regularly broken into song. For those gathered outside government headquarters, “Sing Hallelujah to the Lord”, a popular Christian hymn, has been a favourite. “Do You Hear The People Sing?”, a tune from “Les Misérables” and the unofficial anthem of protests in Hong Kong in 2014, has also made a reappearance. The songs are powerful, as protest music has been for centuries, channelling voices together into something moving, even beautiful. On occasion, priests have led the crowds, giving them the appearance more of a giant church choir than an angry rabble. But the surest sign of the music’s power has not been the singing in Hong Kong but its absence in mainland China. “Do You Hear The People Sing?” has been censored on QQ Music, one of the country’s most popular music streaming services. Search for the song, and three results pop up, all saying that it cannot be played for copyright reasons. Search for the full “Les Misérables” album, and there are more than ten versions of it, minus that one song. On NetEase Music, another popular streaming service, censors appear to have been a little less zealous. Individual searches for “Do You Hear The People Sing?” yield no hits, but it still appears as a track on its various “Les Misérables” albums.  The protesters in Hong Kong in 2014 were not the first to call on the song. It has featured in a series of demonstrations, including the Maidan revolution in Ukraine, which kicked off in late 2013, and union marches in Wisconsin in 2011. The appeal is obvious, given its rousing tune and lyrics: “Do you hear the people sing?/Singing the songs of angry men?/It is the music of the people/Who will not be slaves again!” That said, aficionados of “Les Misérables”, a musical based on the novel by Victor Hugo, know that the story is rather less cheering: the students who lead an anti-monarchist rebellion (a depiction of the Paris Uprising in 1832) almost all end up dead. Exactly when censors started scrubbing out the song in China is unclear. Before the Hong Kong protests, they had little reason to worry about it. A musical film of “Les Misérables” was a hit in the West in 2012 but a flop in China. The main controversy about the song back then was whether the official translation was good enough. As recently as last year, authorities permitted a performance of “Les Misérables” in Shanghai. That may well have been the event that caught the censors’ attention: at the end of the show, audience members rose to their feet and belted out “Do You Hear The People Sing?” in unison. Perhaps they were just fans of the musical, but the song evidently had the ability to stir emotions in China. Censorship is rarely water-tight, and that is certainly the case for music. The Chinese government has taken a hard line against Hong Kong singers such as Denise Ho who supported the pro-democracy movement in 2014: their music is no longer available on streaming services and their concerts in the mainland have been cancelled. But on smaller streaming services such as Xiami, which is estimated to have a roughly 2% market share in China, “Do You Hear The People Sing?” is still available. What’s more, censors do not appear to have cottoned onto the fact that “Sing Hallelujah to the Lord” was the protest song of choice on the streets of Hong Kong during the past week. QQ Music offers 11 different versions of it. Chinese fans of contemporary Christian pop should listen while they can.