EARLY IN “Diego Maradona” there is a chaotic press conference. The celebrated Argentine playmaker has been signed by Napoli, an Italian football club, and he is being unveiled to more than 80,000 ecstatic fans at Stadio San Paolo. A journalist puts a loaded question to Corrado Ferlaino, the club’s president: how could Napoli—then one of the lowest-ranking teams in Serie A, Italy’s top league—afford the world’s most expensive player? He is insinuating that the Camorra, a mafia network, might have helped to make the transfer possible; in the film, this signposts the trouble that lies ahead for the star. Asif Kapadia, a British film-maker, focuses on Mr Maradona’s career between 1984 and 1991, spanning his time in Italy and his captaincy of Argentina at the 1986 and 1990 World Cups. As in his previous two films, “Senna” and “Amy” (which won an Oscar for Best Documentary Feature), Mr Kapadia crafts his narrative from old footage. Much of the grainy video featured in the film was shot by two jobbing camera operators hired by Jorge Cysterzpiler, Mr Maradona’s former agent, for a film about the footballer. As that movie was never made, much of the tape has never been seen before.  The director highlights his subject’s supremacy on the pitch—“The Golden Boy” guided his country to a World Cup win in 1986 and Napoli to its first Serie A title in 1987—but gives plenty of space to his antics off it, too. Mr Maradona recounts socialising with the Giuliano clan, part of the Camorra, which supplied him with protection and cocaine. Drug binges in seedy Neapolitan nightclubs would begin after matches and continue for three days, at which point Mr Maradona would begin training for the next fixture. This was his routine for years. The film’s most memorable sporting scenes are situated in their historical context. Britain had defeated Argentina in the Falklands war in 1982; had it been a match, Mr Maradona said, they would have won 20-0. When England and Argentina met in the World Cup quarter-final four years later, the atmosphere was fraught. Mr Maradona used his hand to punch the ball past Peter Shilton, England’s goalkeeper: he called it the “hand of god”. Minutes later he dribbled past six England players—including Mr Shilton—to score one of the most stunning goals in football history. Social divides in Italy, particularly between north and south, are also laid bare. Footage shows Napoli’s followers enduring execrable abuse from supporters of northern Italian teams: visiting fans hold banners which read “cholerati” (“cholera infected”)—there had been an outbreak in Naples in 1973 in which people had died—and chant that Mount Vesuvius should “wash them with fire”. As a result, Mr Maradona called on Neapolitans to support him and Argentina, rather than their native Italy, in the 1990 World Cup semi-final, played in Naples. Argentina went on to win the game on penalties, with Mr Maradona scoring from the final, crucial kick. Many Italians never forgave him, particularly for encouraging some to renege on their national side. Indeed, Mr Maradona is not a likeable hero. He is crude, teaching his young daughter to chant expletives in the manner of an extreme “Napoli ultra” fan. He makes sexist remarks, and he refuses to acknowledge a love-child for decades. But it is hard not to feel some sympathy for him. He winces in agony as he receives pain-killing injections for sciatica, a nerve condition, in order to play. Mr Maradona’s sister, Maria Rosa, recalls that he became the family breadwinner aged 15, after being signed by Argentinos Juniors, a club in Buenos Aires. He moved his parents and seven siblings into his city-centre flat from the slums. “It was a lot of responsibility for a 15-year-old,” Maria Rosa says with sadness. “He was never able to be himself after that.” Mr Ferlaino, meanwhile, describes himself as “Maradona’s jailor”, having refused the player’s repeated requests to leave Napoli in 1989. Stuck in the city and with no means to cope with the pressures of fame, he went off the rails. All he had was the Giulianos, who in the end dumped him too. Once they had withdrawn their protection Mr Maradona soon tested positive for cocaine during a random drug test, and was banned from competing for more than a year. His career never recovered. “Diego Maradona” tells a compelling story, and it paints a vivid picture of Naples in the 1980s and its football-mad inhabitants, as well as of a troubled star. It is Mr Kapadia’s finest documentary to date. “Diego Maradona” is screening in Britain now. It will be released in America in September