IT IS A good rule in matters genetic to assume that things are there for a purpose. This is not to say that the wrong sort of DNA cannot cause disease. It can. But disease-causing mutations are rare, because natural selection makes them so. Far more common are genes of pedestrian function that are somehow dismissed as dispensable. One such is CCR5, which encodes a protein found on the surface membranes of certain types of cells, especially cells of the immune system. CCR5 is one of a group of membrane proteins called beta chemokine receptors. These are involved in inflammatory responses, but CCR5 does not seem to be essential to such responses. What is crucial about it, though, is that in the wrong circumstances it can harm the body it is in. The reason is that it is one of the proteins onto which HIV, the virus that causes AIDS, latches itself before entering a cell and infecting it.  Those born without normal CCR5, because they have inherited a mutated version of the gene, called delta-32, from both parents (known technically as being “homozygous” for that mutation), are thus resistant to HIV infection. And a couple of cases in which people already so infected have had delta-32-homozygous bone-marrow transplants as part of treatment for leukaemia, and have then seen their AIDS go into remission, suggest that the protective effect has been transplanted with the marrow. This has led to the proposal of disabling CCR5 in AIDS patients’ bodies as a way of curing them. (Current anti-AIDS drugs, though effective at suppressing symptoms, are not cures.) Homozygously disabling CCR5 from the get-go was the excuse offered last year by He Jiankui, a Chinese researcher who was the first to engineer genetically human embryos that were then brought to term in a mother’s womb. Work just published in Nature Medicine by Wei Xinzhu and Rasmus Nielsen of the University of California, Berkeley, though, confirms the suggestion that tinkering with CCR5 of those who are not ill, as a prophylactic against the chance that they might one day encounter HIV, is a bad idea. Prompted by evidence that people homozygous for delta-32 CCR5 are more likely than others to die of influenza if they develop that illness, and are also more likely to catch a range of other infections, the two researchers looked in one of the world’s biggest repositories of well-annotated medical samples, the UK biobank. In particular, they pulled out of the biobank the details of 409,693 individuals, now deceased, for whom good genetic data were available. Comparing DNA with lifespan, and making suitable adjustments for the age-profile of those in the database being different from that of the population as a whole, Dr Wei and Dr Nielsen calculated that people who are homozygous for delta-32 CCR5 are 20% more likely than those who are not to die before the age of 76. Presumably, though this is still guesswork, delta-32 homozygosity damages the body’s immune response and gives infectious agents a helping hand. That shows just how rash Dr He’s actions were, and that the descent on his head of the world’s wrath was warranted.