FOR JOHN LOCKE, the 17th-century political philosopher, anarchy was when a leader “has the liberty to be judge in his own case”. In a properly constituted society, disputes between contending parties are turned over to a third party for adjudication—an independent judge who can apply the law and issue a fair judgement. America’s judiciary generally fills this role. But on June 27th, a bare majority of the Supreme Court declared a crucial issue—partisan gerrymandering—outside its portfolio. The court told state legislators they are their own bosses when it comes to drawing electoral maps for their legislatures and for Congress. No matter how blatantly or egregiously the lines are skewed, the federal judiciary will remain studiously above the fray. Legislators may choose their voters, rather than the other way around, and nobody will blink. The decision will give a bigger boost to Republicans, because they control more state houses and governor mansions. While it closes the door to claims of political gerrymandering, race-based gerrymandering remains subject to judicial review.  The opinions in Rucho v Common Cause were penned by the court’s best writers: Chief Justice John Roberts for the five-man conservative majority, Justice Elena Kagan for the four liberal dissenters. But the opinions offer starkly different visions of the courts’ role in preserving democratic norms and institutions. Whereas the chief summoned a raft of arguments to explain why there is simply no manageable way for judges to determine when a gerrymander goes too far, the dissent characterised the ruling as abrogating a “duty to declare the law” on a matter that is fundamental to the very functioning of American elections. “The districting plans at issue here are highly partisan, by any measure”, Chief Justice Roberts began, but the lower courts that struck them down inappropriately “exercised judicial power” by declaring them “unconstitutional as well”. In dutifully laying out the facts of cases from North Carolina and Maryland, the chief expressed no alarm and said little about the bigger picture. He did, however, note some of the most alarming details, including a comment in 2016 from an architect of North Carolina’s congressional map securing a 10-3 Republican advantage in the House of Representatives. The legislator stopped at 10-3—in a state that is fairly evenly split between Republicans and Democrats—because he did “not believe it [would be] possible to draw a map with 11 Republicans and 2 Democrats”. Judges cannot stop stunts like this, even those that may “reasonably seem unjust”, Chief Justice Roberts wrote, because challenges to engineered maps “present political questions beyond the reach of the federal courts”. Objections to partisan gerrymandering are, in technical terms, “non-justiciable”. Federal courts “have no license to reallocate political power between the two major political parties”, the chief justice wrote, because there are “no legal standards to limit and direct their decisions”. In dissent, Justice Kagan replied with a truism: what the court says “can’t be done has been done”. In recent years, “federal courts across the country...have largely converged on a standard for adjudicating partisan gerrymandering claims” and struck down maps drafted by both parties that are extreme outliers. The same advances in technology that permit modern gerrymanderers to carve precise maps to entrench their power afford challengers a tool to demonstrate just how engineered the lines are. In North Carolina, the Republican Party's map was, according to software analysis, “the absolute worst of 3,001 possible maps” for Democrats, the “only one that could produce a 10–3 partisan split even as Republicans got a bare majority of the state-wide vote”. The chief may fret over how much partisanship is too much, and declare that there is nowhere to draw a line, but, the dissent argues, surely the courts could agree that such a map is unfair to voters of the state’s minority party. In a rather feeble attempt to soften the blow of his decision, Chief Justice Roberts wrote that the majority’s “conclusion does not condone excessive partisan gerrymandering” and points to reform measures in Congress and in the states that could ease redistricting concerns. Several states have, indeed, turned line-drawing over to independent commissions in an attempt to push toward fairer maps. But curiously, in 2015, Chief Justice Roberts wrote a strong dissent in a case narrowly upholding the constitutionality of just such a commission in Arizona. That solution may not survive another challenge in the hands of the Supreme Court’s strengthened conservative majority. And the chief set himself up for ridicule when observing that a redistricting reform bill, first drafted in 2005, “has been reintroduced in every Congress since”. Well, Justice Kagan quipped, it “might be reintroduced until the end of time”. What all the proposals “have in common”, she wrote, “is that they are not laws”. Which brings us back to Locke. There is an obvious reason why legislative fixes are not on the horizon. “The politicians who benefit from partisan gerrymandering”, like judges in their own cases, have no incentive to deal fairly with rivals. These legislators “are unlikely to change partisan gerrymandering” and because they “maintain themselves in office through partisan gerrymandering, the chances for legislative reform are slight”. With no one watching over them, and with increasingly sophisticated methods of identifying optimal maps to warp elections, legislators are now empowered to gerrymander at will. Partisan redistricting has already “debased and dishonoured our democracy”, Justice Kagan wrote, “turning upside-down the core American idea that all governmental power derives from the people”. But with the door now shut on lawsuits and assurances that no one in the federal judiciary will meddle in their plans, gerrymandering legislators have a green light to skew electoral maps exactly as they please—a regime that could “irreparably damage our system of government”.