AT THE opening of the American pavilion at the Venice Biennale Lewis Eisenberg, America’s ambassador to Italy, stepped up to the microphone. He congratulated Martin Puryear and remarked that the title of his exhibition—“Liberty/ Libertà”— made him think of Ronald Reagan, who had often spoken of freedom. Perhaps he had yet to see the exhibition. The American president’s tenure was defined by the cold war and the crumbling of the Soviet Union; Mr Puryear’s focus for five decades has been black Americans’ historic struggle for human and civil rights. When chosen to represent the United States in Venice, he said he would do so “as both an artist and a citizen”.  The son of a school teacher and a postal worker, Mr Puryear grew up in Washington, D.C., and his exceptional sculpting skills, most notably with wood, seem to date from his childhood. When he became interested in music, he made a guitar; later, an interest in archery inspired handmade bows and arrows. At university he switched from a degree in biology to one in art, specialising in painting. Later, as a member of the Peace Corp in Sierra Leone, watching African craftsmen at work encouraged him to return to 3D forms. But he studied print-making in Sweden before finally returning home in 1969 to study sculpture at Yale. He won acclaim with his first solo show at the Corcoran Gallery in D.C. in 1977, went on to take the grand prize at the São Paulo Biennial in 1989 and earned the National Medal of the Arts in 2012. In 2007 a retrospective of his work at the Museum of Modern Art in New York travelled to Washington, San Francisco and Fort Worth. But in recent years the 78-year-old African-American artist has probably become best known for “Big Bling”, an ambiguous monumental form topped with a gold-leaf shackle, installed in New York’s Madison Square Park in 2016. Here, as elsewhere, Mr Puryear imbues an abstract form with feeling and figurative references. “Ladder for Booker T. Washington”, made in 1996—a star piece of the touring retrospective and now on show at the Museum of Modern Art in Fort Worth—has a similar effect. An 11-metre ladder made of ash, it snakes tentatively upwards, so narrow at the top that its poles almost touch. The artist had set out to explore scale and perceptions of distance, but once the sculpture was finished it evoked for him “the gradual, often illusory, notion of progress that Washington [a civil-society leader] encouraged blacks to adopt in the 19th century against an overwhelming set of obstacles”. In Mr Puryear’s work an everyday object such as a ladder can remind the viewer, unexpectedly, of history. In Venice the neoclassical American pavilion comes with historical baggage of its own: built in 1930, the edifice was inspired by Monticello, the house Thomas Jefferson designed for himself in Virginia. Some artists choose to ignore the architecture, but Mr Puryear engages forcefully with it, creating a work specifically for its central rotunda. A two-metre-high white fluted column, with a shackled stake driven into its top, the piece (pictured above) is a memorial for Sally Hemings, an African-American slave owned by Jefferson. The country’s third president was also the father of her children. In front of the pavilion Mr Puryear has placed a structure much like a rood screen, with lacy decorations that flow into a black hole at the top. Step around the back and you find that the piece, entitled “Swallowed Sun”, in fact has an ugly black tail. “Is it about the darkness of a solar eclipse—or a blackout when values are in jeopardy?” asked Brooke Kamin Rapaport, the curator of the pavilion, as the artist looked on, saying nothing. Inside the building another commonplace object—headgear—invites the viewer, on the one hand, to celebrate revolutionary struggle, and on the other to contemplate violence. “Big Phrygian”, a smooth red mound of painted cedarwood with a flipped-over peak, evokes the bonnet rouge worn by revolutionaries in France and later by enslaved blacks in the Caribbean as they rose up against the French (the work might send the viewer trawling Wikipedia to find out more about Trajan’s war against the Dacians, and to grasp how the cap’s symbolism evolved). “Tabernacle” (pictured top), the show’s closer, is shaped like a forage cap worn by both Union and Confederate infantry during the American civil war. The visitor peers in through the hat’s crown to see themselves reflected in a mirrored cannonball nestling in the barrel of a mortar—thus becoming part of the artist’s meditation on gun violence. Mr Puryear has produced one of the most subtle and powerful shows of the Venice Biennale. With eight expertly crafted works he demonstrates both his skill as a sculptor and the originality of his thinking. He once remarked that his work is “more tactile and sensate than strictly cerebral”, but to the onlooker the balance seems fairly even. What impresses is his fusion of the two. The Venice Biennale continues until November 24th