THERE IS a category of music superstar who, while they once divided opinion, became cherished as they attained veteran status. Encountering somebody with a harsh word for Elton John or Bruce Springsteen is rare enough to be surprising; the same was true before their deaths of David Bowie and Prince. Then there is another category of those who, while popular, still engender antagonism (if sometimes unfairly). Foremost in that rank are two men who rose to fame at the head of rock bands: Bono, the lead singer of U2, and the frontman of the Police, Sting. Even in 1978 Sting was an object of contempt among fans of punk music, who saw him as an interloper, an old-style muso with his roots in jazz, riding punk’s coat-tails into the charts. Perhaps that was true, but it overlooked the fact that Sting was unmistakably a major talent in his own right. He was and has remained an outstanding songwriter. The body of work he has created stands up.  “My Songs”, a new album, is a 15-track overview of Sting’s career, but not a compilation; rather, he has seen fit to re-record a set of his compositions, for the most part so closely to the original versions as to appear redundant. (Artists increasingly revisit their own catalogues in this way, perhaps for licensing and royalty reasons as often as artistic ones.) The few notable differences are puzzling: a funky-house take on “If You Love Somebody Set Them Free”, his first solo single post-Police, feels clunky and outdated; a slightly rockier version of “Demolition Man” sheds no new light on the song. Around half of these tracks were first recorded by the Police, so the title “My Songs” rather makes it sound as if Sting is tetchily wresting them back. Still, why should the man who wrote these songs not take proprietorial pride in them? They are all excellent, and there are plenty more he could have included of the same standard. It is no small thing to have written the exquisite “Fragile”, which has lent itself to a superb, epic reworking by Isaac Hayes; to have created “Walking On The Moon” as a perfect vehicle for the Police’s eerie fusion of reggae and rock; to have fashioned perhaps his most celebrated song, “Every Breath You Take”, which is widely misheard as an account of loving devotion, but which is unsurpassed in pop as an (entirely intentional) account of sinister, obsessive and controlling behaviour. Plenty of renowned artists have accumulated lesser catalogues of music than Sting’s while committing worse sins than being found vaguely irksome by a segment of the public. It is also significant to have forged a solo career that rivals or even eclipses his work as part of a successful group: Sting joins Diana Ross, Paul Simon, Michael Jackson, Phil Collins, George Michael, Robbie Williams, Justin Timberlake and Beyoncé, among a few others, in that select club. His most recent new material, “44/876” (2018) —a collaborative album with Shaggy, a reggae star—has charted around the world, some 33 years since his first solo album, “The Dream of the Blue Turtles”, did the same. Perhaps the moment is approaching when nobody considers it worthwhile to dislike Sting any longer, and the best of his music will speak for itself.