NOWHERE BEATS Augusta National for tradition, but by common consent America’s most beautiful golf course is Pebble Beach Golf Links. Hugging the Pacific Ocean cliffs just south of Monterey, California, the stunning property is regularly voted the country’s best public course. It has also been the site of many of the sport’s most memorable moments, including Tom Watson’s famous chip from thick rough to beat Jack Nicklaus in the 1982 US Open. Nine years after the U.S. Open was last held at Pebble, the tournament returns to its most picturesque venue on June 13th. Two players in particular will be chasing history. After winning the Masters at Augusta in April, the 43-year-old Tiger Woods is on the hunt for a 16th major trophy, which would leave him just two behind Mr Nicklaus for the all-time record. And Brooks Koepka, fresh off a victory at the PGA Championship last month, is campaigning to become the first player to win the same major in three consecutive years since Peter Thomson managed the feat in 1954-56.  The swirling ocean winds at Pebble Beach can be nearly as frustrating for statistical modellers as they are for players. By the standards of modern major tournaments, it is a relatively short course, at just 7,075 yards for a par-71. (In contrast, last year’s US Open, at Shinnecock Hills on Long Island, measured 7,445 yards and was only a par 70.) In theory, such accessible distances should yield a flock of birdies and perhaps even an aerie of eagles. But what Pebble lacks in length, it makes up for with nature and design. The omnipresent water hazard crashing alongside most of the course not only swallows up double and triple bogeys, but also forces cautious players into taking indirect lines and awkward lies. And the course’s sharp doglegs, towering trees and narrow fairways limit the use of drivers to a handful of holes. With a humped green that can send even well-placed approach shots scurrying away from the flag, Pebble’s 14th  is the hardest hole, relative to a typical hole of its distance and par value, measured at any major this millennium. According to EAGLE, The Economist’s statistical golf-forecasting system, par-fives around 580 yards long typically took around 4.82 strokes to complete in majors in 2010, the last time the US Open was held there. The unfortunate souls who had to navigate Pebble Beach’s 580-yard par-five that year averaged 5.44. (You can follow EAGLE’s predictions for the US Open as they update in real time at eagle.economist.com.) Because course organisers frequently modify holes from year to year—and adjust green conditions and hole locations once tournaments are underway—EAGLE places little weight on course-wide scoring data from the distant past. (In contrast, the difficulty of each hole relative to the course average tends to be stable over time.) As a result, the model currently expects scoring at Pebble to roughly match the level of a typical course of its length, after accounting for unusually tough holes like the 14th. That would come to an average of 72.35, 1.35 strokes above par, during the first two rounds. The best players, such as Dustin Johnson and Mr Koepka, should fare about three strokes better than that. However, the last time the US Open was held at Pebble Beach, nobody finished below par: Graeme McDowell lifted the trophy at one-over. Should similar carnage be expected on the course this time around? There is good reason to believe this year’s Open field may get the best of Pebble. Overall, by EAGLE’s reckoning, the average golfer in a major today is about a full stroke per round better than they were a decade ago. Since the configuration of Pebble Beach has barely changed since the 2010 Open, that suggests finishing scores for players making the cut should wind up about four strokes lower. Further evidence that Pebble can be beaten can be found in the scores from the AT&T Pebble Beach Pro-Am tournament, held at the course this February. Based on the skill of the players who participated in that event and the course layout—about 200 yards shorter than the US Open design—EAGLE would have expected the average round score in the Pro-Am to be 72.41. The actual average was 71.57, suggesting that the course played slightly easier than expected. Nonetheless, EAGLE is designed to adjust its forecasts rapidly when new data contradict its expectations. If bogeys abound and the birdies are in hiding on Thursday morning, the model’s predictions for all players’ scores will turn bearish in a hurry. Pebble’s modest yardages should also open the field to a wider range of plausible contenders than longer courses do. Whereas the leaderboards on 7,500-yard courses often resemble lists of the biggest drivers, Pebble Beach rewards judgment and precision. That might enable a shorter hitter like Matt Kuchar to end his long-running major curse, or Henrik Stenson, Webb Simpson or Jim Furyk to double their hauls of major trophies. At the other extreme, players whose games depend on power, such as Bubba Watson, Gary Woodland or Tony Finau, could prove ill-suited to Pebble’s demands. Nonetheless, EAGLE’s favourites for the US Open are mostly familiar faces, many of whom wield potent drivers. In the model’s estimation Mr Johnson remains the world’s best player, as he has been for nearly two years, and is the front-runner, with an 8% chance of victory. Thanks to a new adjustment that grants credit to players who have performed better in majors than in other tournaments, Mr Koepka—or #MajorKoepka, as we have dubbed him on Twitter—now ranks second, at just under 7%. Fresh off a victory at the RBC Canadian Open, Rory McIlroy is the third-most-likely champion, with a 5-6% chance. Just two months ago, we were touting Patrick Cantlay, whom betting markets priced as a 100-to-one longshot to win the Masters, as a promising “sleeper pick”. But after finishing ninth at Augusta, third in his next two tournaments (including the PGA Championship), and winning the Memorial Tournament two weeks ago, the public has caught on to Mr Cantlay. He is EAGLE’s fifth-most-likely player to win, with a 4% shot—but now ranks even higher in betting markets, which put him fourth at a 5% probability. In what is likely to be a recurring pattern, the player EAGLE is most bullish on relative to punters is Jason Day. Starting with this year’s U.S. Open, we have modified EAGLE to consider not just players’ final scores on each hole, but also more granular measures of their skill. Although Mr Day is currently ranked just 16th in the world, and has not won a tournament in over a year, his underlying performance measures are outstanding. Among the 156 players who will tee off at Pebble, he ranks second in putting, 11th in driving distance and 17th in scrambling by EAGLE’s reckoning. The only other players in the top 20 in three categories are Mr Johnson, Mr Cantlay and Mr Kuchar. It was just 26 months ago that Mr Day, still just 31 years old, was ranked first in the world. And he has proven he can put it all together on the biggest of stages: in 2015 he shot 20 under par to win the PGA Championship, one of the best marks in modern memory. The only real weaknesses in Mr Day’s game are occasionally spotty iron play and a propensity for errant tee shots. As long as he can find himself on or around the green in regulation, this year’s Open could well prove his—ahem—Day.