IN NINE OF America’s 13 congressional elections between 1994 and 2018, the Republican Party won a greater share of seats than votes. In 2012, Democrats failed to garner a majority of seats while winning a broad popular vote victory. Even in the 2018 mid-terms, which were described as a “wave” election, The Economist predicted that the Democrats had to win the popular vote in the House of Representatives by 5-6 percentage points to obtain a bare majority of seats. In the Senate, the situation is worse because of the way states magnify the pro-rural bias of America’s electoral institutions. Liberal activists and social scientists alike have blamed the Republican Party’s manipulation of the electoral system for much of this. But Democrats are battling a deeper structural problem than partisan gerrymandering. Jonathan Rodden, a political scientist at Stanford University, has written a book that explores the party’s real challenge: political polarisation has become inextricably linked with economic geography and population density. The electoral system magnifies the voices of the poor, sparsely populated and conservative countryside at the expense of voters in densely populated cities who tend to be richer, racially diverse, and liberal.  In “Why Cities Lose: The Deep Roots of the Urban-Rural Political Divide”, Mr Rodden goes back to the 1870s and the origins of the labour movement. The Socialist Party in Reading, Pennsylvania takes on a microcosmic significance: it represented the interests of local manufacturing workers, but failed to win elections that required the input of the rural residents. The socialists were left with no political representation above the city level. So city-dwelling labourers began to find a home in the Democratic Party, which increasingly took on pro-labour views. Party bosses like Al Smith, the Democrats’ 1928 nominee for president, cut deals with local labour leaders to persuade them to join. While the Democratic Party still garnered a majority of its votes from rural areas in the north, the union between Democrats and urban labourers was born. Mr Rodden writes that in 1916, “a doubling of population density was associated with a 7 percent decrease in Democratic voting. By 1940, a doubling of population density was associated with a 5 percent increase”. The story in the South, where there was little organised labour, was quite different: Democrats’ prospects were kept afloat by predominantly rural segregationists, while business-owning Republican won elections in the cities. When, in the late 20th century, the parties’ realignment became complete, the causes were primarily ideological. Presidential elections in the 1950s had been characterised by the Democrats and Republicans taking opposing views on economic policy but they differed little on social issues. Lyndon Johnson’s signing of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 was a notable moment in this realignment, breaking the Democrats’ hold on the South and catalysing the cultural shifts that produced the modern Republican Party. Through the remainder of the century, the diverse constituencies that made up urban areas—the poor, union members, immigrants and minorities, educated elites and young progressives—gravitated toward the Democrats while Republicans enjoyed increasing vote share among the farmers, the rural poor and ultra-wealthy business owners. The result of this history was an electoral system that pitted city-dwellers against the exurban and rural population—with the cities losing. This is where Mr Rodden’s talent with statistics is most evident. He recounts that in Pennsylvania in 2012, Democratic candidates for Congress won 51% of the votes state-wide but came away with majorities in only 28% of the districts. This “strikingly counter-majoritarian result” was not just a product of pro-Republican partisan gerrymandering, argues Mr Rodden. After running a computer programme that generates 400 separate, equally populous congressional maps for the state, Mr Rodden finds that even “party-blind” plans disadvantage Democrats. That year was no hiccup. In all but one presidential election since 1952, the mean congressional district in Pennsylvania was much more Democratic than the median one—a testament to Democrats’ inefficient geographic distribution. This was true as recently as 2018—and not just in Pennsylvania, but nationwide. In last year’s mid-term elections, a majority of voters in Michigan, Wisconsin, Pennsylvania and North Carolina all cast ballots for Democratic candidates for state houses, but the party won a minority of seats. Mr Rodden points out that the 2018 elections introduced another issue for the Democrats: whether or not they will move further left. Increasing liberalism within the party threatens the support of key suburban moderates who act as a barrier to further geographical disadvantage. The nomination of a socially moderate candidate for 2020 could help with that. And yet, opposition to President Donald Trump drove up Democratic margins in key suburban swing districts last year. If the president remains unpopular, Mr Rodden suggests, Democrats could win "narrow victories in districts where comfortable Republican victories had been the norm". Mr Rodden weighs a few longer-term solutions, among them electoral systems used elsewhere in the world. America might, for example, adopt a system of proportional representation. Allocating parties’ legislative seats in proportion to the votes they won would eliminate the geographic disadvantage the Democrats face. But this would require the repeal of a law from 1967, which a Republican-controlled Senate would be almost certain to block. Demographic change is perhaps most likely bring the greatest change in the Democrats’ favour. In the coming years, non-whites and today’s young voters will become increasingly large shares of the electorate. If Democrats run up big margins with these groups, a number of closely-contested states are likely to turn bluer. But winning congressional districts could be hard, and state legislatures harder still, as urban areas with increasing populations would still have to be cracked into several districts to ensure equal populations among them. In the medium-term, Democrats’ best hope of rebalancing the electoral scale lies in converting suburban moderates to their cause and turning out non-voters. Both helped the Democrats overcome a big structural disadvantage in the 2018 mid-terms. But presidential politics are different. And there will still be the small states to magnify the voices of conservative, rural voters, hurting the Democrats’ chances of controlling the Senate. As Mr Rodden writes, "if neither reform nor demographic change is sufficient to diminish urban-rural polarisation, the United States must find ways to function as a divided society." Why Cities Lose: The Deep Roots of the Urban-Rural Political DivideBy Jonathan Rodden. Basic Books; 336 pages; $18.99