ON THURSDAY nights the Chicago White Sox give something back to baseball fans, usually T-shirts for the first 10,000 people through the gates of Guaranteed Rate Field. On July 4th the garment is a handsome navy-blue number to mark Independence Day; on July 25th they remember the legendary Sox team of 1983 with a “Miracle on 35th Street” tee. And today, June 13th, when they play the New York Yankees, they are planning to commemorate one of the strangest—and, for many people, most disgraceful—episodes in their history with a T-shirt bearing the legend: “Disco Demolition – the night records were broken.” Disco Demolition Night took place on July 12th 1979 at the Sox’s old stadium, Comiskey Park. Trying to boost attendance in a season of poor crowds, the Sox invited a local DJ named Steve Dahl to provide some entertainment between the first and second games of a double-header against the Detroit Tigers. Mr Dahl, a rock DJ, had lost his slot at a radio station when it switched formats to disco, and when he got a new job he made much of his unequivocal hatred of the music. This hatred was to be the entertainment for fans. Mr Dahl invited his listeners to bring disco records to the ballpark where he would blow them up, to “end disco once and for all”.  The Sox had hoped for a crowd of 20,000; they got 50,000, with a further 20,000 locked out. During the first game, vinyl records began showering down on the outfield from the seats. The explosion during the break prompted a pitch invasion of several thousand people. Writing in 2014 Mr Dahl recalled it as “a joyous heat- and beer-infused celebration”, though footage shows fans tearing down the bullpen, building bonfires in the outfield and burning banners in the stands. It was described as “a riot” on local news, and it took mounted police in riot gear to clear the field. The second game was abandoned. What made Disco Demolition Night infamous was that it seemed to symbolise the rage of white, male heterosexuality against black, Latino and gay culture. Comiskey Park was situated in the white working-class neighbourhood of Bridgeport, and there had been a history of racist incidents in the area. One African-American member of the stadium staff said that fans didn’t just bring disco records, they brought records by any black artist that came to hand. In Rolling Stone Dave Marsh described it as “your most paranoid fantasy about where the ethnic cleansing of the rock radio could ultimately lead”, while Nile Rodgers of Chic, a disco and funk band, compared it to Nazi book-burning. Mr Dahl continues to insist that it was just a bit of fun—simply “one of the greatest radio promotions in history”, plus an expression of rebellion against a “trendy social elite”, a choice of words that echoes today. He has maintained that he has never been remotely racist or homophobic (he did not respond to a request for comment for this article). Yet the event has come to be seen as an appalling outbreak of prejudice. So there has been a furious reaction to the Sox’s decision to mark the event, with Mr Dahl throwing the opening pitch. “I almost couldn’t believe it, I thought it was a joke,” Marea Stamper, an activist and American DJ who works under the moniker of The Black Madonna, says. She has no truck with Mr Dahl’s defence that he was simply aggrieved about losing his job to DJs playing disco, nor that it was a celebration. “I come from the South, and this was like people burning ‘race’ records—that was white families burning the black music their kids were listening to, and a way of enforcing racial borders and social barriers, with records as an effigy.” For all the decades of writing about Disco Demolition Night, and the analyses of it as a mass act of bigotry, the Sox seemed to have been caught by surprise by the furious reaction to their plans. In response to a request for comment they sent this statement: “This year’s Disco Demolition T-Shirt giveaway was intended to recognise the anniversary of a historic off-the-field moment...We have been communicating with our community partners who have raised concerns to make it clear that the intent of this giveaway was only meant to mark the historical nature of the night 40 years later. We have reinforced that the White Sox organisation is dedicated to advocating for a safe, welcoming ballpark experience for all people and communities...We remain proud of our franchise’s longstanding record on advocating for inclusion and diversity.” Ms Stamper laughs in contempt at that. “It’s not as if they were offering context—it’s not as if there’s a display at the ballpark saying what this riot was about, or even what some people say it was about. If it’s historical, where’s the history?” She thinks it is an ill-thought-out promotional event. “Take any other book burning or destruction of art, and imagine slapping a picture of it on a shirt and giving it away!”