THERE ARE three reasons why Thomas Nast, the 19th-century American illustrator who created the twinkly grandfather image of Santa Claus, decided to place his workshop at the North Pole. The location was cold enough for the reindeer that pulled his sleigh; it was sufficiently remote so that curious children could not contemplate a visit; and it lay in neutral territory, allowing Santa to be an international goodwill ambassador. The last will not be true for much longer. Three states—Russia, Denmark and Canada—are claiming that the seabed and subsoil at the top of the world are part of their countries’ extended continental shelf.  The claims come under the 1982 UN Convention on the Law of the Sea, an international treaty that all the states with Arctic coastlines, except the United States, have ratified (the US says it will abide by it). The treaty states that the first 12 nautical miles from a country’s shore are territorial waters, meaning the country has exclusive rights above and below the waters, and to the airspace. Countries can also claim up to 200 nautical miles from shore as an exclusive economic zone, giving them rights to marine life in the waters and minerals on or under the seabed. This zone can be further extended if the country can prove, using a wide range of scientific evidence, that the seabed is an extension of the country’s continental shelf. Russia, Denmark (on behalf of Greenland), and now Canada on May 23rd have duly filed lengthy reports with the Commission on the Limits of the Continental Shelf, a body set up under the treaty to study the scientific evidence gathered with much blood, sweat and frozen tears. Although the polar ice cap is shrinking because of global warming, large parts of the ocean remain ice-bound for most of the year. To peer at the seafloor, scientists used icebreakers (although even a nuclear-powered one could not penetrate an area north of Greenland), and set up perilous, temporary camps on drifting ice floes. Colleagues on shore did a deep dive into history, trying to establish what was happening in the Arctic before and after dinosaurs roamed the earth. How underwater ridges and mountains formed millions of years ago can help determine which land mass they should be connected to today. The commission decides whether the science backing a claim is robust. Russia was told to do more work on its 2001 submission, which it refiled in 2015. But the body does not resolve disputes. Countries must negotiate an agreement on overlapping claims. And there are many. The Arctic is the smallest ocean, about 14m square kilometres; it accounts for just 4.3% of the world’s total water surface compared with 46.6% for the Pacific Ocean. The bit that does not fall within some country’s exclusive economic zone is only 2.8m square kilometres. Within that area, Russia is claiming 1.2m square kilometres, Denmark almost 1m and Canada 1.2m. All three claim large parts of the 1,800km-long Lomonosov ridge, which divides the Arctic Ocean into two main basins; and all three claim the geographic North Pole. Anywhere else on Earth this would look like a recipe for armed conflict. A steady drumbeat of stories about the militarisation of the region creating a new cold war in the Arctic lends support to that idea. Russia has been forthright about its ambitions. It made a big deal of planting a titanium Russian flag on the seabed at the North Pole in 2007. Yet armed conflict over rival claims is unlikely for two reasons. First, relations between countries and communities in the Arctic, although strained since the Ukraine crisis of 2014, remain cordial for the most part. The template for co-operation was set in 1996 when the eight countries with Arctic coastlines set up an inter-governmental forum called the Arctic Council, where they and indigenous peoples could co-operate on matters affecting the region. The sharp remarks made by Mike Pompeo, the American secretary of state, on the fringes of last month’s meeting of Arctic Council ministers in Finland were a break from this trend. (He criticised, among other things, Russia’s and Canada’s claims to control sea routes in the High North.) More in keeping with it was the presence of Russian lawmakers at a meeting in May of Arctic parliamentarians in Ottawa, even though Chrystia Freeland, Canada’s foreign minister, is banned from visiting Russia because of her strong denunciation of its actions in the Ukraine. Co-operation is most evident in the scientific domain. To collect its data, Canada conducted joint surveys with Denmark, Sweden and the United States, with which it has an overlapping claim in the western Arctic. The scientists who posed for a photo at the North Pole in 2016 displayed the flags of 14 countries. Russia, Denmark and Canada could have blocked the commission from studying a rival’s claim, but each gave the required permissions and have remained in close contact throughout. Harold Brekke, a former commissioner from Norway, was cited as a special advisor on all three submissions. The prospect of a resource war looks equally flimsy. The US Geological Survey made headlines in 2008 when it estimated that the Arctic region contained 30% of the world’s undiscovered gas and 13% of its undiscovered oil. But most of the known or suspected reserves are within the 200-mile limit of national exclusive economic zones. Those found further out would be uneconomic to exploit because of the hostile environment and the distance to the ports and pipelines connecting the north to markets farther south. Commercial fishing in the high seas of the Arctic is already banned under an agreement signed in 2017 by the eight Arctic states plus China, Japan, South Korea and the European Union. As Andreas Osthagen, of the Fridtjof Nansens Institute in Norway, told the High North News, “there is very little to fight over’’. Laying claim to the North Pole appears to be more a matter of prestige than economic potential. A hefty backlog at the commission means the matter will not be settled soon. Canada estimates it will be another decade before its submission is dealt with. The three countries have made their respective cases and now face what may seem like an interminable wait—a bit like children feel while waiting for Santa Claus at Christmas.