THERE ARE not a lot of things at which the English can still claim to be world champions, but being twee is one of them. Even the Scandinavians, with their bicycles and midsummer celebrations and hygge, cannot match the everyday tweeness of the English, who go on holibobs (holidays) and say “soz” (sorry) because they can’t make it “tomoz” (tomorrow). The Scandinavians have dark winters and darker thrillers to balance out their twee. All England has is rather grim soap operas, and Brexit. Twee, for those unfamiliar with the term, is a word that means cute, or precious, but in an excessive, affected kind of way. Lovely little villages with little model versions of themselves and cosy pubs and shops that sell only brollies (umbrellas) or jumpers (sweaters) or puds (desserts) are twee. And this is a particularly English affliction. The Welsh are not twee. Nor are the Scots, or, heaven forfend, the Irish (saying “heaven forfend” is definitely twee).  Which brings us to “Good Omens”, a book published in 1990. The authors, both legends in their own right, are Neil Gaiman, latterly of “Sandman” and “American Gods” fame, and the late Terry Pratchett, of the “Discworld” series. Being both English writers with a penchant for dressing in black and writing humorous sci-fi/fantasy novels, the pair’s collaboration inevitably produced a book that used twee as its narrative engine. Nearly three decades later, Amazon Prime has brought it to the screen in six very twee episodes. “Good Omens” revolves around an angel, Aziraphale (Michael Sheen, combining twee with camp), a demon, Crowley (David Tennant channelling Bill Nighy in “Love Actually”), and the end of the world. Aziraphale and Crowley have been on earth since Genesis. They have come to quite the like the place—it’s set in Oxfordshire, perhaps the twee-est county in England—and grown reasonably fond of each other too. So with the end of the world approaching, and bosses on both sides quite keen to have a good, old-fashioned showdown, the pair sets out to try to avert the apocalypse. Not for the good of humanity: it’s more that heaven is pretty dull and hell rather unpleasant. They are neither helped nor hindered by “The Nice and Accurate Prophecies of Agnes Nutter, Witch”, which is the name of a book of predictions in “Good Omens” and also the subtitle of “Good Omens”, the book, itself. Does it all work, and rise above the twee? Yes and no. The whole point of the book, and indeed the series, is to revel in the twee-ness. The show tones it down somewhat, thankfully, but not very much. It is, therefore, a simple decision for any viewer: regardless of the actual plot, acting, set design, or any other aspect of the content of “Good Omens”, those who like twee will like the show. Those who don’t will find it tedious and pointless. And for everyone else it will fall somewhere on the spectrum between mildly entertaining and mildly irritating. Because the thing about twee is that, like English weather, its defining characteristic is its very mildness. “Good Omens” is available on Amazon now and will be broadcast on the BBC later this year