IN 1986, the Supreme Court ruled 7-2 in Batson v Kentucky that racial bias in jury selection violates the Sixth and Fourteenth Amendments. A lawyer cannot strike a potential juror from a case without a "neutral" reason, Batson held, and defendants who suspect racial bias may raise an objection. More than three decades later, on June 21st, the justices again split 7-2 in Flowers v Mississippi, a case involving a prosecutor who consistently excluded black prospective jurors from the six murder trials of Curtis Flowers, a black Mississippian. Mr Flowers was charged following the murder of four furniture-store employees in 1996. He was charged with each individual murder in the first four trials and for all four deaths in the fifth and sixth trials. The majority opinion in Flowers, penned by Justice Brett Kavanaugh, stretched to 31 pages but, as it said, broke “no new legal ground”. The ruling “simply enforce[s] and reinforce[s] Batson by applying it to the extraordinary facts of this case”. The facts are, indeed, striking. In the six trials, Doug Evans, the prosecutor, used peremptory challenges (for which a lawyer need offer no reason, as opposed to a strike "for cause" that does cite a justification) to eliminate 41 of the 42 black prospective jurors. In the sixth trial, the one at issue in Flowers, he excluded five of six. In the apparent hope of finding “pretexual reasons to strike” them, Justice Kavanaugh wrote, Mr Evans “engaged in dramatically disparate questioning of black and white prospective jurors”. And he excluded one black potential juror, Carolyn Wright, for reasons that should have resulted in a challenge to white jurors for whom the only relevant difference seemed to be their race. Prosecutors said Ms Wright was struck because she knew a few witnesses and worked at the same WalMart as Mr Flowers's father. But several white potential jurors were also familiar with players in the trial and faced less questioning and no challenge.  In the first three trials, the Mississippi Supreme Court chastised Mr Evans for violating Mr Flowers’s right to an impartial jury and reversed the convictions. The fourth and fifth trials ended in hung juries, with no verdict. But Mississippi’s high court found no problem with Mr Evans’ behaviour the sixth time. In the latest trial, there were 26 potential jurors, six black and 20 white. The prosecution used five of its six peremptory strikes against black prospective jurors, resulting in 11 white jurors and one black juror. When Mr Flowers raised a challenge to the fairness of his trial under Batson, the Mississippi Supreme Court rejected it. The United States Supreme Court then told the state court to take another look at the matter in light of its 2016 decision in Foster v Chatman, another jury-discrimination decision. After a second examination, the Mississippi Supreme Court again sided with the prosecution. But the vote was 5-4, and a dissenting judge said he believed the majority had badly erred. “I cannot conclude that Flowers received a fair trial”, he wrote.The five-judge majority “completely disregard[ed] the constitutional right of prospective jurors to be free from a racially discriminatory selection process”. After walking through the justification and implications of Batson and the facts of Mr Flowers’s case, Justice Kavanaugh concluded the four dissenting judges on the Mississippi Supreme Court had it right. The state’s case against Mr Flowers was “motivated in substantial part by discriminatory intent”. “Equal justice under law”—the words carved into marble above the familiar pillars of the Supreme Court’s main entrance—”requires a criminal trial free of racial discrimination in the jury selection process”. Justice Kavanaugh’s thorough opinion attracted the votes of Chief Justice John Roberts and the four liberal-leaning justices. Justice Samuel Alito joined the judgment but wrote separately to emphasise that Flowers is “a highly unusual case” and “likely one of a kind”. If not for the “unique combinations of circumstances present here”, Justice Alito would have affirmed the Mississippi Supreme Court’s ruling. Justices Clarence Thomas and Neil Gorsuch did not find any circumstances worthy of vindicating Mr Flowers’s constitutional rights. In a biting 42-page dissent, Justice Thomas recounted the 1996 killings in detail and blamed his seven colleagues for “needlessly prolong[ing] the suffering of four victims’ families” and disrespecting Mississippi’s state courts. (The majority may have sided with Mr Flowers, the dissent speculates, to “boost its self-esteem”.) Looking through the record, Justice Thomas finds no evidence of racist prosecutorial intent. “Any competent prosecutor would have exercised the same strikes as the state did in this trial”, he wrote. In a section of the dissent Justice Gorsuch did not join, Justice Thomas attacked Batson itself: the ruling “was suspect when it was announced, and I am even less confident of it today”.