IF THERE is one thing that people on both the left and right can agree, it is that expressions of our political and social differences have become markedly less cordial—and that this makes it harder to find common ground and solve common problems. The good news is that science is on the case. Empathy is not like a person’s adult height, something unalterable. Instead, it is a characteristic that can be actively encouraged or discouraged. This is the central message of a new book, “The War for Kindness: Building Empathy in a Fractured World”, by Jamil Zaki, the director of the Social Neuroscience Lab at Stanford University.  The ability to structure our workplaces, schools, public spaces—and even media—to increase interactions with people from other walks of life may boost the respect that people bestow on others. This, in turn, may go some way towards helping societies to overcome political polarisation, racism, anti-immigrant anger and cultural divisions. Although Red Staters and Blue Staters, or Brexiteers and Remainers, may not lock arms—any more than the lion will lie down with the lamb—at least they will be able to talk to each other without their faces turning purple with rage. The Economist’s Open Future initiative asked Mr Zaki several questions about what empathy is and how to foster it. Following that is an excerpt from his book, on the importance of contact with others to improve relations. * * * The Economist: What is empathy and how can we measure it? Are people less empathetic today than in the past? Jamil Zaki: Empathy is our ability to share and understand one another’s feelings—a psychological “superglue” that connects people and undergirds co-operation and kindness. Psychologists and neuroscientists measure empathy in numerous ways: including asking people how much they care about others, measuring how much they mimic others’ facial expressions or flinch when someone else is in pain, testing how accurately they decode others’ experiences, and examining overlap in brain activity when people experience pleasure versus seeing others happy. The most common measure of empathy, a questionnaire, has been completed by hundreds of thousands of people since the late 1970s. About ten years ago, psychologists examined these data over time and found a steep drop in empathy, especially in the 21st century. Strikingly, the average American in 2009 scored as less empathic than 75% of people in 1979. We do not know the causes of this decline, though the rise of online technology and increasing polarisation seem relevant. Whatever the source, this drop in empathy should concern all of us. The Economist: How can we harness the latest findings in neuropsychology to increase empathy? Mr Zaki: The first step is to understand that we can increase our empathy. My least favorite phrase in neuroscience is “hard-wired,” the idea that because something resides in the brain, it is fixed and immutable. People often have that notion about empathy—that each of us has a “level” of care built in to us, which, like our adult height, will never change. But our brains are plastic, and change in response to experiences, habits and practices. The same goes for empathy. For instance, in a landmark study published two years ago, neuroscientists trained people in “loving kindness” meditation, a contemplative practice focusing on building people’s care for others. After several months of this practice, people reported greater empathy, understood others’ feelings more precisely and acted more generously to strangers. But even more strikingly, parts of their brain associated with empathy grew in volume, underscoring not only how we can increase empathy, but that we can. In fact, my colleagues and I have found that even understanding that empathy is under our control empowers people to work harder at it, especially with people who look or think differently than themselves. The Economist: Building on that, populism, anti-immigration and anti-“other” is on the rise—how can we realistically redesign our community interactions, workplaces, schools, media, etc, to apply neuroscience and psychology to defeat this? Mr Zaki: One of our most powerful psychological instincts is to divide people into categories; for every “us” there is a “them.” This turns pernicious when mixed with competition, conflict and fear. Under these circumstances, empathy evaporates or even reverses into schadenfreude, or enjoyment of the other side’s suffering. The wreckage of America’s political climate, mixed with social media and online bullying, can seem like a schadenfreude buffet. Counteracting these trends means putting people in the position to replace “us and them” with “you and I”, as well as the incentives to see outsiders as people, rather than mere symbols of their group. One reliable way to do this is to bring people from different groups together under egalitarian circumstances and with shared goals. Another way is to encourage people to understand how empathy can be useful to them. For instance, my colleague Robb Willer has found that when people empathise with individuals on the other end of the political spectrum, they can actually argue more persuasively for their own position. The Economist: Using your methods, won’t empathy simply develop in those who are prone to be empathetic anyway—leaving the most vile people unaffected and the world unimproved: a snowflake of kindness amid a blizzard of misanthropy? Or am I being too cynical? Mr Zaki: I think cynicism is understandable in this cultural moment. I see it all around me, which is part of why I wrote the book. But despite appearances, even “vile” people have the capacity to become more caring under the right circumstances. In the book I tell the story of Tony McAleer, a neo Nazi whose early life was an embodiment of hatred, anger and fear. If anyone would be lost to empathy, it would be him. And yet after meeting a Jewish man who refused to hate him back (again, moving from “us and them” to “you and I”), he reformed. Tony and his colleagues now run the group Life After Hate, which extracts others from the dark places they once inhabited. There are ample data points demonstrating that people with low empathy, even psychopaths, can turn on their care when properly motivated to do so. The Economist: What is the most important finding from the science of empathy that people don’t know, that if they did know, the world would be a better place? Mr Zaki: The first insight people should take with them is that we can grow our empathy if we want. Our emotions are not animalistic impulses that are out of our control. We can guide them, empathising with purpose—in ways that accord with our values. A second insight is that empathy is helpful, not just to the people around us, but to ourselves as well. It is easy to think of empathy as a squishy soft-skill in a hard world, which allows us to be nice, but also leaves us open to be trampled or left behind. But in many ways, empathic individuals finish first: experiencing greater happiness, less stress and greater professional success. Poetically, one of the best ways we can help ourselves starts with caring for each other. * * * Hatred versus contact Excerpted from “The War for Kindness: Building Empathy in a Fractured World” by Jamil Zaki (Crown, 2019) In 1943, a race riot seized Detroit. World War II had transformed the city into a weapons factory, and people poured in from around the country as manufacturing boomed. Housing became scarce. Black workers were excluded from housing projects and often paid triple the rent whites did. When the city earmarked a new project for black tenants only, whites burned crosses outside it. As summer arrived, racial tension boiled over. On June 20, blacks heard that a white mob had thrown a woman and her child off the Belle Isle Bridge; whites heard that blacks had raped and killed a woman on the same bridge. Neither event had actually occurred, but the imaginary mobs spawned real ones. They clashed, and in the next thirty-six hours, thirty-four people died, hundreds were injured, and thousands were arrested. It was a national disgrace and a low point for American race relations. But there was a glimmer of hope: whites and blacks who had worked or studied with members of the other race were far less likely to join in the riots, and more likely to engage in peaceful behaviors, such as sheltering other-race individuals from violence. The psychologist Gordon Allport noticed this, and saw a trend: The better people knew outsiders, the less they hated them. This was true elsewhere as well. Seventy-five percent of residents in all-white housing projects said they would dislike living alongside blacks, but only 25 percent of white residents in mixed projects actually disliked having black neighbors. Sixty-two percent of soldiers in all-white platoons opposed integrating the armed forces; among whites who had been in a mixed platoon, that number was 7 percent. In his magnum opus, The Nature of Prejudice, Allport reasoned that bigotry often boils down to a lack of acquaintance. Its antidote was just as simple: Bring people together, and they’ll awaken to their common humanity. A similar thought led Mark Twain to quip, “Travel is fatal to prejudice, bigotry, and narrow-mindedness, and many of our people need it sorely on these accounts.” In psychology, this idea came to be known as “contact theory,” and it caught fire. Allport’s book, published in 1954, became a bestseller; he delighted in spotting it at airports and malls alongside beach novels. Thanks to him, optimists everywhere came to believe that hatred was a misunderstanding and that contact could fix it. Allport stressed that contact would not always work. In some cases it could make things worse—for instance, whites who merely saw more blacks, but didn’t get to know them, might perceive them as a threat. Time has proven Allport right. The visibility of immigrants in the United Kingdom fueled a nationalist wave that crested with Brexit. In Canada, Tony used the presence of immigrants to whip up white aggression. Even moderate people can be driven toward prejudice by the wrong type of contact. In a recent study, the political scientist Ryan Enos planted Latino passengers on a Boston commuter train at the same time each morning for ten days. White commuters who had been on a train with Latinos grew less tolerant of immigration than they had been before, or than passengers who took the very next train. Even when contact doesn’t hurt, it might not help. “Goodwill contact without concrete goals accomplishes nothing,” Allport wrote. He laid out a recipe for how to make it useful: Bring groups together and give them equal status, even if one group has more power the rest of the time. Focus on their mutual goals. Make it personal; let people learn about each other’s idiosyncrasies. And support cooperation between groups through the institutions around them. Fulfill these tenets, Allport claimed, and contact could do wonders. The theory might sound naïve—less rigorous science than Haight-Ashbury handholding. But it’s one of the most well-studied concepts in psychology. In a recent analysis of more than a quarter of a million people, the pattern was clear: The more time someone spends with outsiders, the less prejudice they express. Contact warms sentiments toward many types of outsiders. Imagine two straight, young, able white people born in the United States. Evidence suggests that the one who gets to know a diverse group will exhibit less bias toward black and Hispanic people, immigrants from Asia, Mexico, and Central America, elderly and disabled people, and the LGBTQ community than their more sheltered counterpart. Contact can work even when people don’t seek it out. White college freshmen randomly assigned to black roommates are less prejudiced by spring than students with same-race roommates. It doesn’t take a school year to help people warm up to new groups, either. In one recent study, trans- and cisgender canvassers went door-to-door in Florida to discuss transgender rights. After meaningful conversations with trans canvassers, residents’ transphobia dropped substantially, and they remained more tolerant three months later The punchline is simple: Hatred of outsiders is ancient but not inevitable. When people work, live, or play alongside each other, divisions between them melt. To understand why, remember that empathy is a choice, and conflict gives people great reasons to avoid it. When groups compete for scarce resources, they must circle the wagons and scrap for their side. [...] Tribalism becomes natural and—from evolution’s perspective—wise. A linebacker who feels the pain of a running back would have a hard time doing his job; a soldier would find hers impossible. As a result, people in conflict don’t merely misplace their care; they actively throw it away. In one series of studies, conservative Israelis reported that they would prefer not to empathize with Palestinians. This preference, in turn, predicted their actual lack of empathy, for instance when they read about a Palestinian child with cerebral palsy. Even if callousness is a smart choice during war, it’s a terrible way to achieve peace. Contact remedies this by giving people reasons to care about outsiders. We crave connection and will work to keep social bonds strong. When an outsider joins the ranks of our friends or colleagues, empathizing with them aligns with that goal. The benefits compound: Empathy for one outsider can lead to caring for their entire group. Contact also makes avoiding empathy harder. The sorrow and hope of a neighbor, friend, or colleague are often impossible to block out. Contact can build empathy even in the toughest settings. After sectarian violence in Northern Ireland, Catholics and Protestants dehumanized each other, but they did so less if they had friends on the other side of the conflict. White Americans who work or live with blacks or Muslims express higher empathy when members of these groups are pro led by law enforcement. Empathy, in turn, promotes solidarity. After the conflict in Ireland, people who felt empathy toward outsiders were more willing to forgive them; in the United States, white Americans who empathized with minority individuals mistreated by police were more likely to join Black Lives Matter protests. ______________ From the book “The War for Kindness: Building Empathy in a Fractured World” by Jamil Zaki. Copyright © 2019 by Jamil Zaki. Published by Crown, an imprint of Random House, a division of Penguin Random House. All rights reserved.