READING the first 25 pages of Chief Justice John Roberts’ opinion in Department of Commerce v New York, one gets the impression he sided with the Trump administration in its quest to add a citizenship question to the 2020 census. Indeed, on most of the contested legal questions, the court agreed with the government. But in the final three pages, the chief, joined by the court’s four liberal justices, issued a rebuke to Wilbur Ross, the commerce secretary, who was responsible for the change. The stakes of the ruling are enormous: population data from the decennial census are used to determine the number of representatives—and therefore electoral votes—allocated to each state. A severe undercount of Hispanics, as opponents of the administration feared, might dilute the political representation of blue states like California; some red states, like Texas, would also be affected. The data also determine the flow of billions of dollars in government cash. The decision to add the question “cannot be adequately explained” by the official justification—gathering improved citizenship data to enforce the Voting Rights Act—Chief Justice Roberts wrote. There is a “significant mismatch” between Mr Ross's decision to add the query and “the rationale he provided”. If the government wants to ask census-takers if they are citizens, it needs to come up with a justification that is “reasoned”, not “contrived”.  If the agency takes up the Supreme Court’s offer to rejig its rationale for adding the citizenship question, it has fewer legal hurdles to clear. Chief Justice Roberts saw to that in the previous sections of his opinion. First, there is no constitutional bar to the question in Article I of the constitution, as the challengers had claimed. The requirement that Congress conduct an “actual enumeration” of people living in America every ten years, the court concluded, is not violated when the government knows that a new question will decrease response rates. So even though government experts warn that the query would scare off many Hispanic households, resulting in an undercount of some 6.5m people, the decision to ask it is not unconstitutional on those grounds. Second, the court decided that Mr Ross did not act arbitrarily or capriciously in adding the question to the decennial census rather than rely on administrative records to gather citizenship data. When Judge Jesse Furman concluded otherwise in his district-court ruling last year, he “improperly substituted [his] judgment for that of the agency”. But in the opinion’s final section—described by the other four conservative justices as “regrettable” (Samuel Alito) and reflecting “the din of suspicion and distrust that seems to typify modern discourse” (Clarence Thomas)—Chief Justice Roberts explained why he doubted the sincerity of Mr Ross’s stated rationale. Though Mr Ross claimed he started pondering the citizenship question after only a week in his position, the record “contains no hint that he was considering” voting rights of minorities as the impetus. The “sole stated reason” for the change, the court found, “seems to have been contrived”. A year after deferring to Donald Trump’s reasons for barring travel from several predominantly Muslim countries, Chief Justice Roberts drew a line in the sand. The Supreme Court must be “deferential” to administrative decisions, he wrote, but “we cannot ignore the disconnect between the decision made and the explanation given”. Nor should the justices display overweening “naiveté”. Agencies must provide “genuine justifications”, not pretexts, “for important decisions”. While “reasoned decision-making...calls for an explanation for agency action”, Mr Ross offered a mere “distraction”. There has been little reason to see the Trump administration’s stated justification for the citizenship question as anything but a ruse. As Justice Elena Kagan put it at the hearing on April 23rd—foreshadowing the ruling on June 27th—“you can’t really read this record” and conclude that the rationale was anything but “contrived”. More recently, it emerged, from files found on his hard drive, that Thomas Hofeller, a late Republican strategist, had played a central role in the decision to add the citizenship question and in drafting a memo laying out the Voting Rights Act as the rationale. His aim was to gather citizenship data so that Republicans could more effectively gerrymander electoral maps in their favour. This came to light after the census case was briefed and argued, and thus could not factor into the court’s decision. But that did not stop the parties from dispatching a flurry of notes to the justices requesting, and arguing against, a re-opening of the case in the district court in the weeks leading up to the ruling. Chief Justice Roberts’ opinion has the feel of a brokered compromise—it even reads as if the final section may have been added or revised late in the process. It is impossible to know if the new evidence reported in the media affected the chief’s move. He seems to have changed his mind before in an explosive case—the Obamacare challenge in 2012—as Joan Biskupic recounts in her recent biography of the chief justice. What happens now? The commerce department gets another go at coming up with a justification for including the citizenship question. That might be a tall order, but Chief Justice Roberts’s opinion suggests that as long as it is genuine, it could pass muster. That is true even if the justification is crassly political: “A court may not set aside an agency’s policymaking decision”, the decision reads, “solely because it might have been influenced by political considerations or prompted by an administration’s priorities”. But there is another wrinkle: a new case, arising from Mr Hofeller’s files, claiming the citizenship question targets Hispanics and therefore violates the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. A ruling from the federal court in Maryland could take a while, as could an appeal to the Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals. In the meantime a preliminary injunction could stymie the citizenship question—even if the government supplies an adequate reason for the change. It is unclear exactly how much time there is left to resolve all of this. The government originally said it needed to finalise the questionnaire to begin printing the census on July 1st; if that is the case, the citizenship question is doomed. But other documents show October 31st as the real deadline, which would give the courts a few more months to work everything out. In a tweet on June 27th, Donald Trump expressed displeasure with the ruling and said he has asked "the lawyers" if the census can be delayed "no matter how long". The answer—no—is in the constitution: the census must be conducted "within every...term of ten years". (The timing is also defined by congressional statute.) It remains to be seen whether citizenship will appear on the 2020 census, but the Supreme Court's decision is certainly a blow to the Trump administration’s plans.