THIS SUMMER Europe is sweltering in unusual temperatures. Germany, Poland and the Czech Republic have seen record-breaking temperatures for June. France has recorded its highest temperature—45.1C (113.2F)—of all time. Heatwave, scream myriad headlines. But what exactly is it? Martha and the Vandellas had a definition. According to their hit of the same name, released in 1963, a heatwave involved an inability to stop crying, the feeling of being possessed by the devil, high blood pressure, and a “burning in my heart”. Their wording is a model of precision compared with that provided by the World Meteorological Organisation (WMO), the UN agency that calls itself “the authoritative voice on the state and behaviour of the world’s atmosphere”. A heatwave, it says, is a “marked warming of the air, or the invasion of very warm air, over a large area; it usually lasts from a few days to a few weeks”. That sounds downright pleasant to residents of cooler climes and does not capture the lethal menace of the weather phenomenon. Is there not something more precise?  Governments have been late to the game when it comes to establishing exact criteria for heatwaves and public heat-warning systems. They have been more active since 2003, when stories about elderly people in France dying alone while their families were on holiday fed public outrage. And they have also responded to the increased frequency of periods of extreme heat in recent years. Yet a survey by the WMO in 2015 found that around one-third of countries still lacked criteria for defining and reacting to heatwaves. Worryingly there is no commonly accepted definition for the point at which the public should be alerted. Some differences are logical because heatwave warnings depend in part on what residents are used to. The temperatures currently keeping Parisians sweating on the Metro would barely warrant a mention in Furnace Creek, California, which has recorded the world’s highest temperature (56.7°C, or 134°F, in 1913). It makes sense to tailor warnings to local conditions. For example, Environment Canada, a government department, warns residents of Prince Edward Island when the temperature will reach 27°C, but sets a threshold of 35°C for the arid interior of south-eastern British Columbia. But maximum temperature is only one of a number of variables that can add up to a killer heatwave. Others include humidity, air pollution, wind conditions, the minimum night-time temperature and how long the hot spell lasts. National definitions vary widely, depending on which of these variables are included, how they are measured, and even on the timing of warnings. An alert in England means the heatwave is expected within three days. In Belgium, it means the hot weather has already arrived. The WMO is encouraging climate and health scientists to develop a measure that could be used more widely in forecasts and warnings. Many are in development, including a universal thermal climate index, which combines air temperature with measures of its effect on the human body. But for now, the answer to what is a heatwave is that it depends on where you are.