“THIS IS a man’s world,” sang James Brown in the spring of 1966. The adage still holds true today. In 2015 the United Nations General Assembly approved the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), a collection of targets for social progress to be achieved by 2030. The goals closest to being met are those for hunger and nutrition, water and sanitation, and health and education. In contrast, one of the objectives that the world is farthest from meeting concerns gender equality. A recent report from Equal Measures 2030, an initiative co-sponsored by the Gates Foundation, ranks 129 countries on a scale from zero to 100 on 15 of the 17 SDGs, taking measures on 51 issues including health, gender-based violence and climate change. Data are drawn from UN agencies, the World Bank, NGOs, think-tanks and Gallup, a polling firm.  On gender equality, the index shows that no country exceeds the 90-point threshold to be considered “excellent”, though Denmark, the top performer, comes close with a score of 89.3. It is closely followed by nearby Finland, Sweden, Norway and the Netherlands. Unsurprisingly, fragile and conflict-ridden states, such as Niger, Yemen and the Republic of Congo lag far behind. Chad, the lowest-ranked country on the list, scores just 33.4 points. The global average score of 65.7 is “poor”, according to the index’s scoring system. Just 8% of the world’s population of girls and women live in countries that received a “good” rating of 80-89 points. Overall, countries’ scores on the index seem to track national income levels. Notable exceptions are South Korea, Switzerland and the United States, which all have lower gender-equality scores than might be expected considering their wealth. In the United States, for example, this is caused by poor performance on indicators related to poverty and women’s participation in the economy. At the other end of the scale is Rwanda, which does better than its national income level might suggest. One of the reasons for this is the high proportion of female members of parliament. Women make up 61% of its lower house, the highest percentage in the world. But this also demonstrates the limits of statistical targets: even though a far higher share of the legislature is female in Rwanda than in Denmark (where the proportion is just 37%), its parliament is little more than a rubber-stamp.