WHEN FATOU JALLOW was crowned as Gambia’s beauty queen in 2014, it was one of the happiest days of her life. But it was the prelude to a nightmare. Soon afterwards Yahya Jammeh, then the country’s dictator, asked the 18-year-old to marry him. Ms Jallow refused, but Mr Jammeh’s aides kept calling. After accepting an invitation to his home to attend a religious event, Ms Jallow was drugged and raped by Mr Jammeh. “He asked me what made me think that I could deny him,” she recalls. “I kept screaming and he kept telling me no one could hear me.” Ms Jallow’s torment was far from an isolated case in a dictatorship reviled for its many abuses. Human Rights Watch and TRIAL International, rights groups based in New York and Geneva respectively, have detailed several other allegations of rampant sexual abuse, violence and coercion by Mr Jammeh and his aides. Their report, released today, includes accounts from three women who allege the former dictator raped and sexually assaulted them.  Mr Jammeh, who had seized power in a coup in 1994, was ousted in early 2017 after losing an election in late 2016. But public anger against him lives on in Gambia, stoked by a stream of new revelations about the horrors of his rule. Many have emerged in testimony before a Truth, Reparations and Reconciliation Commission established by Gambia’s new president, Adama Barrow, to investigate the old regime’s crimes and recommend prosecutions. Mr Jammeh’s henchmen known as “the junglers” and his intelligence agency killed and tortured thousands. Journalists and activists disappeared in the night, and families often never saw the victims’ bodies again. Many were thrown into an airless dungeon known as the “crocodile hole” beneath the headquarters of Mr Jammeh’s intelligence agency. The longer he ruled, the more crazed Mr Jammeh became. He once detained and drugged an estimated 1,000 villagers with a powerful hallucinogenic drug because he thought that witchcraft was responsible for the death of a family member. He also claimed to be able to cure people of HIV with his bare hands. He also stole just about everything that was not nailed down in a poor country of about 2m people. When he fled into exile in Equatorial Guinea he did so in his Rolls-Royce, leaving the state’s coffers empty. Human-rights groups and many of Mr Jammeh’s former victims hope that they can get him to stand trial for his crimes. To do so they hope to generate enough international pressure on Equatorial Guinea to force its president, Teodoro Obiang, to hand him over. Reed Brody, an American lawyer working with Human Rights Watch, points out that many of Mr Jammeh’s victims came from other west African countries, including Ghana and Ivory Coast. These included 56 west African migrants who were massacred in 2005 by Mr Jammeh’s men. Mr Brody think that the latest rape allegations will add further pressure. “Rape is one of the vilest of crimes,” Mr Brody says. “It’s going to be harder and harder for Obiang to keep protecting Jammeh.” Ms Jallow managed to escape Gambia and now lives in Canada, where she is studying social care. Talking about what happened “is my duty to other girls,” says Ms Jallow. “I am willing to open the gate and make sure that this man will one day face justice. I want to send a message to men in our society, that we’re not property, that we’re not goats.”