AS DEFIANT circus performances go, it wasn’t too bad. “Invincible socialism” was the title of the show which North Korea had put on especially for the benefit of Xi Jinping, China’s president. Following a banquet with Kim Jong Un, the North’s dictator, on June 20th, Mr Xi was treated to fireworks, mass aerobics and a large flip-card image of his face produced by thousands of performers, all set to rousing music against a backdrop of Chinese and North Korean flags. A write-up in the Rodong Sinmun, a North Korean propaganda mouthpiece, on the following day said the crowd had enjoyed the reminder of the blood the two neighbouring countries had spilled to secure their redoubtable workers’ paradises. The display topped off the first day of Mr Xi’s two-day state visit to North Korea, which Chinese state media had announced earlier in the week. The day had not been short on pomp. Earlier, Mr Kim had given his visitor a red-carpet welcome at the airport, complete with gun salutes, goose-stepping soldiers and crowds waving flowers and balloons, before whisking him off in an open-topped car for a tour through the streets of Pyongyang, the capital.  It was Mr Xi’s first visit to North Korea since he and Mr Kim took the helm of their respective countries. China’s leader took his time over it: Mr Kim has been to visit him four times over the past year and a bit, starting with a first secretive trip to Beijing in March 2018. The fixed smiles and expansive talk of socialist brotherhood are par for the course. Despite their frequently uneasy relationship, in public the two neighbours regularly affirm their ideological kinship and eternal partnership. The latest shindig came a few days before the anniversary of the North’s invasion of South Korea in 1950, which started the Korean war, and ahead of Mr Xi’s planned encounter with Mr Trump at the G20 in Japan next week. (China says America requested the meeting with Mr Xi as soon as news broke of the Chinese leader’s visit to Pyongyang.) The timing suggests that Mr Xi may be looking for leverage over America in the two countries’ deepening trade war. Mr Kim, for his part, may have been seeking to send his own signal to America, that Mr Xi continues to stand by him even as nuclear negotiations between North Korea and America remain stuck in a rut. It is not known what precisely the two dictators discussed once they retired to a guest house for talks. According to Chinese and North Korean state media, they exchanged opinions on a range of “serious international issues”, including the political situation on the Korean peninsula. One of those “issues” appears to be needling America into further concessions in order to break the deadlock in nuclear talks. According to Chinese state media, Mr Kim complained to Mr Xi about American intransigence, saying his country had not received “positive responses” from an unnamed party despite taking “many active measures to control tensions”, though he promised to remain “patient” with this mysterious foot-dragger for the time being. Mr Xi reportedly said that China was willing to assist “within its capacity” with the North’s concerns about security and economic development, which some analysts speculate may indicate a loosening of sanctions enforcement against North Korea by China. He also said that America and North Korea should “accommodate each other’s reasonable concerns”. The relatively moderate tone of the reported comments suggests that, for now, neither man is particularly keen to anger Mr Trump. For North Korea, a return to the frequent tests of long-range missiles and nuclear bombs that preceded last year’s diplomatic efforts is not on the cards. Mr Trump, for his part, seems relaxed about the situation: “We’re either going to have a good deal and a fair deal or we’re not going to have a deal at all, and that’s ok too,” he said at a rally in Florida on Tuesday. That suits Mr Xi, whose greatest worry with respect to his small neighbour is unpredictability. For Mr Kim a greater degree of sanctions-busting is a huge boon. But the basic problem—that America wants Mr Kim to give up its nuclear weapons, but that he shows little inclination to do so—is not going away.