ON THE morning of June 29th Donald Trump, America’s president, extended the most casual of invitations from his hotel room in Osaka, where he was attending a meeting of the G20 hosted by Japan. “If Chairman Kim of North Korea sees this, I would meet him at the Border/DMZ just to shake his hand and say Hello(?)!,” Mr Trump wrote on Twitter. After all, Mr Trump was already scheduled to visit the “demilitarised zone” between the two Koreas the next day, after a meeting with Moon Jae-in, South Korea’s president. Why not throw in a meeting with North Korea’s dictator, whom he had met twice before in an effort to get North Korea to abandon its nuclear weapons. Mere hours later, North Korea pronounced Mr Trump’s suggestion “very interesting”. Interesting enough that, on the afternoon of June 30th, Mr Kim and Mr Trump met for the third time in just over a year. Following a tour of the South Korean side of the DMZ, which also took in a windswept guard post and a canteen where troops presented the president with a golfing outfit, Mr Trump strolled towards the dividing line in the truce village of Panmunjom. He shook hands with Mr Kim, who was waiting for him on the northern side, before stepping across the line into North Korea. The moment was heavy with symbolism: it was the first time a sitting American president had set foot in North Korea, and it came 69 years, nearly to the day, after American troops had entered the Korean war on the South’s side.  During a brief chat on the northern side, Mr Trump said it was an “honour” to visit North Korea. Mr Kim appeared chuffed: “I never expected to see you in this place,” he told Mr Trump, who then invited the North’s dictator to visit the White House. Afterwards, the two stepped back across the line into South Korea, where they posed briefly for a photo with Mr Moon before retiring for talks to “Freedom House” on the southern side. Mr Moon, who needs negotiations between America and North Korea to restart in order to advance his ambitious agenda of inter-Korean economic cooperation, was effusive throughout. “The flower of peace is blossoming on the Korean peninsula,” he said. As well as being a gift for Mr Moon, the summit was also a boon for Messrs Trump and Kim. The president’s comments during and around the meeting will have pleased Mr Kim. Mr Trump downplayed North Korea’s recent tests of short-range missiles, claiming America did not consider them missile tests. Mr Kim’s nuclear programme barely got a mention: for all the world, it looked as though Mr Trump was perfectly happy to engage with North Korea on its own terms, implicitly acknowledging the regime’s nuclear-armed status as legitimate. These comments, along with the pictures of Mr Trump stepping into North Korea and saying that he was honoured to be received by Mr Kim, are gold for the North’s domestic propaganda machine, which is bound to use them to demonstrate the great leader’s diplomatic acumen. They may go some way towards brushing up Mr Kim’s domestic image following the collapse of the pair’s previous summit, in Vietnam in February. North Korea’s failure to win relief from sanctions at that meeting seems to have so infuriated Mr Kim that he demoted his chief negotiator and is rumoured to have punished other aides. But the decision to meet Mr Trump again suggests that he still holds out hope of benefiting from continued negotiations. Mr Trump’s effusiveness about his friendship with Mr Kim is also likely to burnish the dictator’s image internationally. Mr Trump, for his part, used the occasion to congratulate himself for saving the region from the devastating conflict that he claimed would be racking it had it not been for his efforts. “We are in a much different place than we were two and a half years ago,” he said. He complained repeatedly and at length about the media, whose lack of appreciation for his efforts he deemed “insulting”. He also seemed to enjoy the theatricality of the meeting, which was enhanced by its supposedly impromptu nature. It remains unclear whether the encounter really was arranged in just 24 hours. On the one hand, the chaotic scenes at Panmunjom (including the White House press secretary getting into a fight with North Korean security officers) did not suggest extensive planning. On the other, the two leaders had been exchanging letters in the weeks leading up to the meeting, and Mr Trump had brought his entire team of nuclear negotiators along with him on his long-planned visit to Seoul. If peace-making is taken to mean improving relations with a rogue dictatorship, the meeting certainly had some value. But it contributed very little to America’s aim to persuade North Korea to give up its nuclear weapons. In a press conference following his encounter with Mr Kim, Mr Trump told reporters that the two sides’ negotiating teams would get together in the coming weeks to arrange working-level talks. “They’ll start a process, and we’ll see what happens,” he said. Arms-control experts have been hoping for the start of that process ever since Mr Trump announced his meeting with Mr Kim in Singapore more than 13 months ago. The failure to get down to nitty-gritty talks had been taken as a sign that North Korea was not really serious about disarmament. Even if negotiators do finally start chewing over details, there is little reason to imagine that Mr Kim is ready at last to surrender his nuclear weapons. But he and Mr Trump do like a photo-op.