CALL IT a victory. Compared with crippling tariffs on all exports to the United States that President Donald Trump had threatened to impose, starting at 5% on June 10th and escalating to 25%, just about any deal was going to look good for Mexico. News of an accord reached by Marcelo Ebrard, Mexico’s foreign minister, to have the tariffs suspended indefinitely caused relief and celebration across the country—even before its contents became clear. “Ebrard deactivates Trump,” screeched the front page of El Heraldo, a newspaper, the morning after the deal on June 7th. “Mexico wins,” ran another. A saga that had threatened to hobble the still-young presidency of Andrés Manuel López Obrador became instead a crisis averted. Mexico’s president announced that a rally he had planned in central Tijuana in “defence of national dignity” would now become a celebration of Mexico’s success at the negotiating table. On June 8th governors, bishops and unionists joined the president on the stage at a traffic intersection as locals climbed atop bus stops and taco stands to glimpse the festivities. “To President Donald Trump I raise not a closed fist, but an open and honest hand,” said Mr López Obrador.  But he is not the only president doing a victory lap. Mr Trump wants to turn Mexico into the wall that he promised but has so far failed to build. He tweeted his satisfaction that Mexico would take “strong measures” towards halting the inflow of Central American migrants. In May some 144,000 people tried to cross the southern border of the United States, double the number in February. Almost all of them had travelled through Mexico rather than from it. Mr Trump’s defenders argue that using tariffs as a threat to force Mexico to get tough on migration was a masterstroke. The accord includes the expansion of “Remain In Mexico”—a fledgling scheme that forces migrants to wait in Mexico while their claims for asylum in the United States are processed— from a few checkpoints to the entire American-Mexican border. From June 10th Mexico will also deploy 6,000 troops of its newly created national guard to two states—Chiapas, bordering Guatemala, and Oaxaca, which has a narrow isthmus—to stop migrants and people-smugglers. That will dent the number of migrants reaching the United States, though flows across the US-Mexico border tend to dip anyway in the scorching months of June and July. The sides did not set specific reduction targets. The deal allows the United States to demand more from Mexico within 90 days if numbers do not fall as much as the Trump administration would like. But it is less impressive than Mr Trump claims. “Remain In Mexico” was already set for expansion. Mexican officials describe the deployment of the national guard as an “acceleration” of what they were planning to do anyway. Mr Trump tweeted that Mexico had agreed to “immediately buy large quantities of agricultural product from our great patriot farmers”. Mr Ebrard clarified that, if spared Mr Trump’s recession-inducing tariffs, Mexico would be in a better position to buy many different things. Mexico has toed a fine line in negotiations. Mr Lopez López Obrador initially responded to Mr Trump’s threat by penning an affectionate letter—a strategy for presidential seduction borrowed from Kim Jong Un. Mexico froze two-dozen bank accounts linked to people-smuggling operations and locked up two activists involved in helping so-called migrant caravans travel through Mexico. But it also rebuffed other requests, particularly pressure to accept “safe third country” status, which would, in effect, allow the United States to reject the asylum application of anyone who set foot in Mexico beforehand, and send back to Mexico those who make it into the United States. Mexicans officials say they also had to explain to their counterparts that their border with Guatemala, porous and often ignored by locals, could be strengthened but not entirely sealed. The peso climbed upon news of the deal, but not to the level it was before Mr Trump first unsheathed his tariffs threat. That suggests that markets have priced in the chance of a return to conflict. It also suggests that investors do not believe that the USMCA, Mr Trump’s recently struck revamp of the NAFTA trade pact, provides the kind of economic certainty that free-trade deals are supposed to. From North America to North Korea, Mr Trump has made a habit of threatening to abandon his own deals even after reaching them through brinkmanship. Mexican negotiators know that Mr Trump can enrapture his fans and distract his enemies by chucking bombs at Mexico, and has every reason to do so again before his bid for re-election in 2020. “It’s like Alcoholics Anonymous, we live one day at a time,” says one. In the eyes of Mr López Obrador critics, it is he, not Mr Trump, who has performed a humiliating climbdown. Mr López Obrado entered office promising to end the mass deportations of Central Americans carried out by past Mexican presidents. Indeed, the drop in the number of migrants detained during his first months in office, which American officials blame for the rise in illegal crossings, drew Mr Trump’s ire. Despite rhetoric about respecting migrants’ rights, Mexican officials concede that deportations are all but certain to rocket. Tijuana thus made for a bittersweet location for Mr López Obrador’s victory rally. The city is not just the cradle of Mexican-American integration, or a state that the president’s party swept in state elections on June 2nd. It is also the final destination for many of the migrants on their way to America. Among those thronging Tijuana were two strolling visitors who chanced upon the president’s speech. Valerio Doctor, a Haitian migrant, had been in Tijuana for 15 days, following a three-month trip mostly by bus from Ecuador (many migrants arrive in Mexico from afar via Ecuador or Chile, the nearest countries with generous visa-free travel rules). In Port-au-Prince, Haiti’s capital, he had five children and no work. So with his friend he left to seek a path to prosperity elsewhere. In a crowd Mr Doctor watches Mr López Obrador vow to fortify the very border he and his friend had just crossed. Until that moment, the pair knew nothing of the deal. Mr Doctor still hopes to cross to the United States or, if it will not have him, to stay in Mexico. How the deal struck with so much fanfare and consequence 24 hours earlier will affect him is still unclear. The lot of poor migrants is often hard and uncertain. For those who try to follow Mr Doctor, it is likely to be harder and more uncertain.