PREDICTING EARTHQUAKES is doomed to failure, as seismologists well know. But some political earthquakes are a different matter. In the early hours of June 7th, the Brexit Party’s candidate, Mike Greene, came close to winning the first seat in Parliament for a party that was created just two months earlier. He fell just 683 votes short of Labour’s winning candidate in a by-election in Peterborough (see article). Even so, the result amounts to a political tremor that was much predicted, though perhaps not the Big One that some had expected.  The Labour and Conservative parties won a combined 52% of the vote in Peterborough, losing a total of 43 percentage points since the last general election in 2017. Across the country, the combined support for the Tories and Labour has dropped to about 40%—the lowest share since 1979—according to The Economist’s analysis of Westminster voting-intention polls. The last time both parties’ support took a big simultaneous dip was in 2010, when the Liberal Democrats briefly polled in second place following an impressive televised debate by their leader, Nick Clegg. Even then, Labour and the Tories still had 65% of the vote in the election—25 percentage points higher than today’s share. The two big parties risk being overtaken by the upstart Brexit Party and the Liberal Democrats, who enjoyed a revival in last month’s local and European elections. Trends in party support now look more like the wobbly lines of a seismometer than the decades-old separation between the two biggest parties and the rest. Brexit is the main cause of their instability. Historically, the Conservatives and Labour have fought elections mainly on domestic issues, such as levels of government spending and the National Health Service. But the vote to leave the European Union in a referendum in 2016 opened a new fault-line within the country and within both main parties. As Britain polarises over Brexit, a growing number of voters want parties that represent clear, stark views of EU membership: leave without a deal, or reverse the referendum and remain. This is the culmination of social changes that have been taking place since the 1980s, and reflect striking differences between old and young, and between university graduates and the poorly educated. But the two main parties have so been able to rely on Britain’s first-past-the-post electoral system—which penalises smaller parties—to hold on to a disproportionate share of seats in Parliament. Given the state of the polls, as well as the results from Peterborough, their supremacy is at stake. Rob Ford, a political scientist at Manchester University, says that the biggest barrier to a political realignment in Britain is in convincing voters that third parties are viable, but “If people stop believing that the major parties are the only ones that can fly, that becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy.” A great tectonic shift is underway in British politics. Whether Labour and the Tories survive the earthquake will depend on how well they can adjust to the shifting ground.