BOOK-PRIZE ceremonies are often a bit of a let-down. Until the outcome is revealed, much of the focus is on what the seating plan and choreography suggest about the identity of the winner. After the announcement, everybody goes home. And they can be oddly unintellectual. The avowed purpose is to promote literature, but they generally feel more like horse-races than symposiums, the chatter dwelling on sales boosts rather than ideas. Not so the Pushkin House book prize, which was awarded in London on June 12th. Pushkin House is a venerable London-based charity that promotes Russian culture and Anglo-Russian dialogue. In 2013 it introduced a prize for nonfiction books about Russia, written or translated into English (this blogger was one of the inaugural judges). Beginning as a modest event, these days the ceremony is conducted over a glitzy candlelit dinner at the Charterhouse, a medieval former monastery in central London. But the centrepiece is not the meal, or even the awarding of the prize, but the discussions with the shortlisted authors that punctuate the evening.  Together these encapsulated why the Russian world remains so fascinating and essential a subject—the geographical and moral scale, the grotesque suffering and misrule, the bravery, the ideas and the impact on everybody else. Mark Galeotti, author of “The Vory”, a portrait of the Russian mafia, explained that the “the underworld is basically the dark shadow of the upper world”. He warned of “the danger of the Olympian moral perspective” of outsiders, when confronted with (for example) the turmoil of Russia in the 1990s. “Would I have broken the law?” Mr Galeotti asked, if all those round him were doing so—thus pointing up the ethical dilemmas that Russia often poses for its visitors. He elucidated the concept of the “honest thief”: a crook who doesn’t pretend to be otherwise, unlike the police and the bureaucrats. Heroism was spotlighted alongside the depravity. Taylor Downing, author of “1983: The World at the Brink”, referred to the Soviet mole in NATO who helped to avert nuclear Armageddon during a little-known cold-war near-miss. Western policymakers “knew nothing about what the [Soviet] leadership was thinking”, he reflected, just as, for all their sophisticated intelligence, they know little of the mind-sets of Iranian and North Korean leaders now. Ben Macintyre, author of the “The Spy and the Traitor”, recalled that the tasks entrusted in London to Oleg Gordievsky, a KGB officer secretly working for Britain’s MI6, included election-meddling and the dissemination of fake news. “He’s a difficult man to like,” Mr Macintyre said frankly of his courageous subject, “but an impossible man not to admire.” Mr Gordievsky’s “nose is very slightly put out” by the poisoning of Sergei Skripal in Salisbury last year, the author confided; “he doesn’t think he’s that big a fish.” A running theme was Russia’s relationship with Ukraine—a fraternity that shaped Russian literature but has now been tragically shattered. “You cannot imagine Russian cultural history without Ukraine—and the other way around,” remarked Andrei Zorin, a professor at Oxford and one of this year’s judges. Three of the authors on the shortlist come from Ukraine; one of the books, “Maybe Esther”, is a “Russian-Polish-German history, written in German” by an author, Katja Petrowskaja, who grew up in Kiev. Another of the Ukrainians, Serhii Plokhy, author of “Chernobyl: History of a Tragedy”, described the startling ignorance that he uncovered during his research into the nuclear disaster of 1986, from operators at the power plant to Communist Party bosses. “We are living in the world of alternative facts,” Mr Plokhy lamented when, at the end of the dinner, he was declared the prize’s winner, in which “the only salvation is the book”. Humour—especially the bleak, existential kind that has been a vital survival technique in Russia for centuries—was another of the evening’s motifs, from Mr Galeotti’s deadpan accounts of his meetings with Russian gangsters, to Mr Plokhy’s view of “Chernobyl”, the hit HBO drama broadcast after his book was published. “They cut a couple of corners—like the people who constructed the Chernobyl nuclear-power plant,” Mr Plokhy said. “If only they had based the mini-series on my book, it would be perfect.”