HISTORY IS not always kind to the overblown, nor does it always reward the deserving. Peter Frampton, for instance, was heard everywhere in his heyday, and the Velvet Underground scarcely listened to in theirs—now it is the other way around. Predicting who will slip from cultural memory and who will be enshrined in it is a fool’s errand, but if justice prevails the reputation of Joan Wasser, one of the outstanding musical artists of the 21st century, will surpass that of many of her more famous contemporaries. It is not that Ms Wasser labours in obscurity. Recording and performing under the stage name of Joan As Police Woman, she has built a substantial career for herself and commands a devoted following. But she lives in the wrong era to be a hitmaker. She might have flourished in the early 1970s, alongside other artists who bridge the gap between the singer-songwriter mode and soul music, such as Carole King, Laura Nyro and Phoebe Snow. Then again, her music draws on influences that would have then been unavailable to her, including Sonic Youth, an avant-punk outfit (whose song “Sacred Trickster” she has covered), and the experimental orchestral pop of Antony and the Johnsons, the band in which she got her break as a violinist.  The group provided her with a creative outlet and a crucial step towards artistic independence. Her life up to that point had been eventful: adopted as an infant (a fact she has intimated is relevant to her impulse to perform), she went on to study classical music and took that training into a series of punk bands. She was three years into a relationship with Jeff Buckley, an acclaimed singer, when he died by accidental drowning in 1997—the tragedy devastated her, and its aftershocks would be felt in her music for years. “Joanthology”, a comprehensive new 43-song collection, tracks Ms Wasser’s work from her self-titled debut EP in 2004 to her seventh album, “Damned Devotion”, released last year. “Joan As Police Woman” was self-released, and it wasn’t until 2006—after signing with Reveal, a British label—that she found an audience that had thus far eluded her at home in America. “Real Life”, her debut LP, echoed Memphis soul (in particular, her beloved Al Green), the Pretenders, Siouxsie Sioux, Nina Simone and the Joni Mitchell of “The Hissing of Summer Lawns” and “Hejira”. It became a critical hit. Ms Wasser, who had not set out to be a singer, proved to be blessed with a warm mezzo-soprano and her songs lost nothing in feeling by being highly sophisticated. “Real Life” and its successor “To Survive” (2008) were beguiling records that dealt obliquely with Ms Wasser’s painful past and her coming to terms with it, as hinted by their titles. It was on her third album of original songs, “The Deep Field” (2011), that she truly came of age as an artist. Where the first two were elegant, rich and soulful, the third was an expression of wild ambition. It combined the sound and the spirit of jazz and psychedelic soul with assured musicianship. “The Deep Field” was a lovely, immersive record, with the air of subtle rapture that has since characterised so much of Ms Wasser’s work. As “Joanthology” illustrates, Ms Wasser is also unafraid to be abrasive—even, at times, confrontational. Those punk years were not wasted. In covering Prince and Public Enemy, she is anything but gimmicky; rather, she rebuilds their songs from the ground up. She takes them on with evident respect but neither fear nor false modesty. Her body of work suggests she has earned the right to.