SINCE LAST August, when the Ebola outbreak in the Democratic Republic of Congo began, the World Health Organisation (WHO) has published regular reports that make for grim reading. With 2,204 cases and 1,479 deaths as of June 19th, this is the second-largest outbreak of Ebola in history. The failure to eliminate Ebola has been complicated by conflict, politics and the weakness of the country’s health system. Money should not be an issue in this sort of internationally led emergency response. Yet it is. After all, if the Ebola outbreak gets out of control, it will quickly become a multi-billion dollar headache for the world, just as it did in West Africa. But the WHO’s resources are stretched thin for its response in Congo. Since February, it has received donations for less than half of the money it has needed to fight the outbreak, and has now all but used up an emergency fund. The WHO warns that operations could grind to a halt during a critical stage of the outbreak. Member states are being urged to meet the funding gap in order to prevent the response from suffering a “potentially devastating setback”.  In February, the projected costs until July were $98m. Of this, the WHO has received from donors only $44m. To stay solvent, the WHO has dipped into a pot of money called the contingency fund for emergencies, or CFE. Since the beginning of the outbreak, it has taken about $73m from the kitty. The CFE is supposed to be there to release money quickly, during a sudden emergency, for example when plague struck Madagascar. It has been used 44 times in the past year. This fast-moving pot of cash can be mobilised in as little as 24 hours and can be critical in life-threatening situations. But the CFE is now “running on fumes” says one spokesperson and is down to less than $4m. The WHO says it will have to scour its reserves to see if more money can be found. But the scale of the shortfall means that for its next planning period, which starts in July, the WHO may have to restrict its operations. Mike Ryan, head of the WHO’s health emergencies, is reluctant to say the organisation will cut any of its core funding for Ebola. This seems to mean that the WHO will, somehow, find the money for the most mission-critical aspects of the response. However, Mr Ryan also concedes that money has become an “obstacle” to completing the job of eradicating Ebola. Either way, the organisation is clearly facing a challenge finding enough cash. Mr Ryan says the WHO is constantly reprioritising, moving money around, “sometimes robbing Peter to pay Paul”. In recent weeks, pressure has mounted on the WHO to declare an official health emergency in Congo. Some, such as Jeremy Farrar, head of the Wellcome Trust, a charity that supports international health, feel that declaring what is known as a Public Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC) would raise awareness about the outbreak and with it more international funding. Declaring a PHEIC is, strictly speaking, a technical designation that commits the WHO to issuing formal recommendations to countries on how to handle the outbreak. However, declaring a PHEIC does focus attention and might have been expected to help drum up extra money. But the WHO feels that there is moral hazard in declaring an emergency simply to raise money. It also weakens the argument for having money available to deal with outbreaks, so that there is no need to call a PHEIC. The situation is sufficiently serious that Britain’s international development secretary, Rory Stewart, is planning a number of trips in the next few weeks to persuade other donors among the G7 to stump up more cash as soon as possible. He may also want to raise the issue of the funding gap for preparing neighbouring countries. This is vital work. According to Tarik Jasarevic, a spokesperson for the WHO, health workers have been trained in infection control, the use of protective gear and creating isolation facilities. Seth Berkley, boss of Gavi, an international vaccine finance agency that has been helping to provide Ebola vaccine, says that close to 5,000 health workers have been vaccinated in 165 facilities in Uganda. Workers in South Sudan and Rwanda have also been jabbed. Already, three cases of Ebola have been confirmed in Uganda. More efforts will be needed to prevent a crisis in one country from becoming a regional disaster.