THERE’S A SAYING in baseball to justify trades in which a team mortgages its future in order to make one improbable run at a championship: ”flags fly forever.” After winning the first National Basketball Association (NBA) title in their 24-year-long history, the Toronto Raptors may need to coin a similar phrase for their sport. Nearly a year ago, Canada’s only NBA team pushed its chips all-in. When LeBron James, the superstar whose teams had reached the playoffs’ final round for eight consecutive years, announced he would sign with the Los Angeles Lakers, he opened the path for a new victor in the league’s Eastern Conference. The East might have seemed like a poisoned chalice, since the prize for winning it was likely to be a date in the NBA Finals with the dominant Golden State Warriors, who had won three of the past four league titles. But Toronto, undaunted, seized the opportunity, trading away DeMar DeRozan, a long-time Raptor and local fan favourite, in a deal for Kawhi Leonard.  The deal was extraordinarily risky. When healthy, Mr Leonard is one of the five or so best hoopsters on Earth, and perhaps the only player in the league who could conceivably lead the league in scoring and win its Defensive Player of the Year award in the same season. However, he had missed almost the entire previous season with a mysterious injury that refused to heal itself, and alienated his old team, the San Antonio Spurs, by insisting on managing his own medical treatment. Moreover, he had only one year left on his contract, and was widely thought to be plotting a move to one of the league’s California-based franchises once he became a free agent. If he either failed to regain his previous form, or did so but then departed after a single season, the Raptors would be left with little to show for their investment. Instead, the gamble worked out better than Toronto could possibly have expected. After resting Mr Leonard regularly during the NBA’s gruelling 82-game regular season to maintain his energy and reduce his risk of injury, the Raptors turned him loose in the playoffs. Mr Leonard rose to the occasion, delivering a performance that brought to mind the highlights of Mr James or Michael Jordan. In the decisive seventh game of the second round, he made one of the most improbable buzzer-beating shots in NBA history to send the Raptors to the semi-finals. After Toronto lost the first two games of the following best-of-seven series, the Raptors’ coach, Nick Nurse, gave Mr Leonard primary responsibility for guarding Giannis Antetokounmpo, the Milwaukee Bucks’ superstar. Even though Mr Antetokounmpo stands four inches taller, Mr Leonard largely kept him in check the rest of the way, enabling the Raptors to win four consecutive games and make their first-ever Finals—as expected, against the Warriors. Betting markets gave Golden State nearly a three-in-four chance to win. But rather than rolling over meekly to the Warriors, as Mr James’s teams had done in the previous two championship series, the Raptors decisively dismantled the league’s reigning dynasty. Toronto did not even need to make use of the home-court advantage that they would have enjoyed in a hypothetical Game Seven, as they won the title on the road in the series’ sixth game, 114-110, on June 13th. The Raptors’ victory was indisputably a team effort: all seven of their regular rotation players, including Kyle Lowry, their star point guard; Pascal Siakam, a versatile, athletic forward likely to win the NBA’s Most Improved Player award; and Marc Gasol, a veteran centre whom they acquired in a trade in February, performed well. But there was no doubt about who would be named the Finals Most Valuable Player. Mr Leonard, who had already won the award once with San Antonio in 2014, amassed video-game-like statistics during the series, averaging 28.5 points, 9.8 rebounds, 4.2 assists, 2.0 steals and 1.2 blocks per game. Golden State partisans will insist that Toronto’s title comes with an asterisk, as the team lost far more in this year’s Finals than just the chance to three-peat. The team’s dynasty is built around four stars: Stephen Curry, the best shooter in NBA history; Kevin Durant, one of the league’s top overall individual scorers; Draymond Green, arguably the NBA’s best defensive forward and passing big man; and Klay Thompson, another elite long-range shooter. The team entered the series hobbled, as Mr Durant had missed all of the previous round with a calf strain. By the time it ended, the Warriors’ hopes of winning a title next season had been dimmed as well. After sitting out during the Finals’ first four games, Mr Durant lasted just 12 minutes on the floor in Game Five before his right leg buckled with a torn Achilles tendon. This heel injury is the single worst fate that can befall a basketball player, one that is not only expected to keep Mr Durant out for much or all of the 2019-20 campaign, but may also prevent him from ever becoming the player he once was again. And adding, well, injury to insult to injury, Mr Thompson ruptured his anterior cruciate ligament in Golden State’s final losing effort in Game Six, which will probably keep him out for nearly a year as well. With both players’ contracts expiring, Golden State will have to let them go and try to sign another marquee free agent—perhaps Mr Leonard himself—to remain a serious contender. No one knows how Toronto would have fared against the Warriors at full strength. Over the course of the series, the Raptors outscored Golden State by six points per 100 possessions. Mr Durant probably improves his clubs by seven or eight points per 100 possessions relative to a typical end-of-bench player at the same position. So assuming that Mr Durant would have played around four-fifths of each game if healthy, the series might have been extremely close. Moreover, if Toronto does not deserve full credit for beating a depleted Warriors team, then the Warriors’ victory over the injury-wracked Cleveland Cavaliers in 2015 was just as questionable. Injuries are part of the game, and flags fly forever. Although the NBA will surely be the worse for the absences of Mr Durant and Mr Thompson in the 2019-20 season, it is probably good for the league that the Warriors’ era is drawing to a close. When Mr Durant signed as a free agent with Golden State in 2016, many fans feared that the following seasons would amount to little more than suspense-free coronation ceremonies. That was, in fact, more or less what happened. Now, a whole host of exciting teams, including Houston, Philadelphia and Milwaukee, will get their chance to shine. If Mr James can lure another superstar to join him on the Lakers, then one of the NBA’s marquee franchises will get back in the hunt as well. And then, of course, there are the Raptors. Now that Mr Leonard has brought Canada its first-ever NBA title, he might be tempted to build a dynasty of his own in the Great White North.