The House on the Hill. By Christopher Impey. The Tangerine Press; 215 pages; £14 THE QUESTION of what prison is for has divided society—not least those entrusted with making and enforcing its laws—for as long as incarceration has been the preferred penalty for the most serious crimes. Should offenders be sent to prison as punishment, or for punishment? Is it enough to merely deprive them of their liberty, or will their debt only truly be paid if the time they spend behind bars is made as uncomfortable and demeaning as the penal codes allow?This is the question at the heart of Christopher Impey’s enthralling book, which is both a social history of HMP Brixton—published in the year of the prison’s 200th anniversary—and of the criminal justice system within which it has played a prominent and often controversial role. It is a question he asks in all urgency, yet with a sensitivity that belies his personal connection to the place (he worked there for nine years, in his former role as managing editor of National Prison Radio, which has been broadcasting from HMP Brixton since 2007). In short, focused chapters, Mr Impey charts the prison’s many rises and falls: from its beginnings as a house of correction built to accommodate a new vagrant class, which had flocked to the fast-expanding city from a rural heartland impoverished by landgrabs and industrialisation; through the eras of Victorian puritanism and modern social reform, during which HMP Brixton was variously regarded as a pit of squalor and despair and a centre for enlightened rehabilitative ideas.Recurring waves of good and ill fortune have beset it, as successive governors have imposed diverse agendas and the nation’s moral fashions have swung between desires for vengeance and forgiveness. Every advance—from the installation, as recently as 1992, of plumbed toilets in every cell, to the opening in 2014 of The Clink, a highly-rated restaurant located onsite, where the menu is prepared and served by prisoners—is mitigated by reminders of historical abuses. There are harrowing descriptions of the infamous treadmill (a 19th-century giant hamster-wheel contraption to which inmates, including nursing mothers, were chained for up to ten hours a day) and of the force-feeding of Irish Republican prisoners on hunger strike in the 1970s.  The arc of history may bend towards justice, but it takes many detours along the way. It is in describing these detours that the book does its best work. With a novelist’s eye for the illuminating detail, Mr Impey provides a series of vivid insights into the lives of those men and women who at one time or another have called HMP Brixton home (originally a mixed prison, Brixton housed only female convicts between 1852 and 1869, and became male-only at the turn of the 20th century). He introduces readers to women prisoners “scraping the walls of their cells and using the powder of the whitewash to whiten their complexion”. He takes them into the prison nursery, home to “youngsters—none aged over four...all dressed in the same spotted blue frocks—their own kind of convict uniform”. During wartime air raids, male prisoners “stood at their cell windows and cheered the British fighter aircraft”.Entertaining digressions abound. A chapter devoted to the successful escape attempts which have occurred over the years reads like a breathless thriller with farcical, Coenesque overtones. A summary of the prison’s celebrity guests includes encounters with Bertrand Russell (who served six months in 1918 for “pacifist activities”), Mick Jagger (a single night on remand for drug possession) and Oswald Mosley (who complained, during his detention for being a Nazi sympathiser, that he found it difficult to read over the din caused by his fellow prisoners playing table tennis).With this anecdotal style, Mr Impey succeeds in crafting an intensely human story from the biography of a building. He finds in its stinking, overcrowded corridors numerous cases of institutionalised cruelty and individual suffering; but he also unearths many examples of striking ingenuity and bonhomie. The lasting effect is not unlike peering at a painting such as Bruegel the Elder’s “Children’s Games”—a teeming, vulgar and transcendent record of medieval life. What appears from a distance to be a collection of incidental figures is revealed, on closer study, to be both an indictment and a celebration of humanity in all its individual abundance and fallibility. The peasant boy riding his hobby horse and the girl poking her stick in a pile of manure are no mere cyphers, they are everyman. By exposing the inner lives behind the prison bars, Mr Impey makes a compelling argument for compassion and rehabilitation. Society has come far since Brixton’s dark infancy; it still has far to go. STEPHEN KELMAN* *Our policy is to identify the reviewer of any book by or about someone closely connected with The Economist. Stephen Kelman is the author of “Pigeon English”, a novel shortlisted for the Man Booker prize, and of “Man on Fire”