SINCE THE 17th century Western societies have elevated reason above feeling as the basis for political action. Emphasising reason in this way presumed that it could be neatly separated from feelings altogether, that they were discrete categories. Politicians who acted on reason alone were virtuous, whereas those who exploited emotions and feelings were deemed to be unscrupulous. But this dimension of the Enlightenment has “run aground”, argues William Davies, a political economist at Goldsmiths, University of London. His latest book, “Nervous States”, documents the struggle between “reason” and “feelings” in politics. It is very much a book for our times.  Mr Davies argues that in pursuit of reason, European countries founded an intellectual architecture that largely survives to this day; the numerous Royal Societies, academies of science, universities, learned journals and newspapers (such as The Economist, launched in 1843) that codified knowledge and developed what came to be known as logico-deductive modes of reasoning. The high priests of these institutions were “experts”, and, as Mr Davies, writes, “their ability to keep feelings separate from their observations was one of their distinguishing traits.” In public life still, he writes, “an accusation of being emotional traditionally carries the implication that someone has lost objectivity and given way to irrational forces.” But for a variety of reasons, some medical/scientific, some sociological and others political, neat distinctions between reason and feelings have broken down. As Mr Davies argues in his book, “Experts and facts no longer seem capable of settling arguments to the extent that they once did.” Indeed, expertise itself is under assault in the age of Trump and Brexit. A lot of polling demonstrates how trust in the intellectual architecture of reason has steadily dwindled, including trust in most professions, and most particularly trust in government, politicians and the media. Instead, people are now allowed to trust and express their own feelings as “alternative facts”. President Donald Trump, for instance, makes much of how he will trust his gut more than any adviser. Mr Davies argues, convincingly, that one reason for this is that, for all its impressive data collection and sophisticated modelling and analysis, “the facts produced by experts and technocrats simply do not capture lived reality for many people”. He attributes this largely to rising inequality in the West. For instance, it does not matter how much an expert bangs on about rising aggregate employment levels and levels of inward investment if the individual does not feel better about themselves. “If there is one thing more important than prosperity to people’s well-being then it is self-esteem. Those suffering a collapse of self-esteem, for whatever reason, are often the most receptive to nationalist rhetoric,” he writes. For this reason, Mr Davies writes, “we have to take people’s feelings seriously as political issues, and not simply dismiss them as irrational.” This, surely, was Hillary Clinton’s mistake in fighting Donald Trump in 2016, hence her unfortunate reference to the “deplorables”, those most likely to vote for Mr Trump. Likewise, in Britain the campaign to remain in the EU in the lead-up to the referendum in 2016 relied entirely on tendentious economic forecasting at the expense of any emotional appeal to a shared European future. The Brexit campaign was the exact opposite, relying almost exclusively on appeals to “feelings” of nostalgia and patriotism. It was also, of course, a vivid rebellion against the tyranny of experts and the “mainstream media”. Democracies are being transformed, Mr Davies writes, “by the power of feelings in ways that cannot be ignored or reversed. This is our reality now.” So how should “bravado rationalists”, as Mr Davies calls them, respond to this new era? One response would be to double down on scientific objectivity and institutions in even bolder terms. “In the face of nationalist reaction, this strategy offers faith in facts as the only means of resistance,” he writes. “It assumes that the unrivalled capacity of rationalist argument among qualified experts will save us from demagogues and nationalists.” But as Mr Davies makes clear, this project has been undermined progressively, particularly now by the populist right. So what would an alternative construct look like, a new philosophy of knowledge to inform our politics for these troubled times? We sat down with Mr Davies to pick his brain. First, argues Mr Davies, it behoves liberals and rationalists to acknowledge where things went wrong. Often they have placed too much faith in statistics and forecasts that proved erroneous. This undermined faith in the whole project of evidence-based analysis more generally: “Macro-economic indicators have been justifiably pulled apart in recent years,” argues Mr Davies. He characterises the era of the Great Moderation, roughly the period from the mid-1990s to 2007, as “an era of expecting numbers to do politics for us”. Governments, such as Britain’s New Labour, grew increasingly technocratic, staffed by policy wonks. Consequently they suffered from a deep ignorance of their own country, a situation that might have been rectified by recourse to other disciplines such as anthropology and ethnography. He particularly references the famous study of Tea Party America, “Strangers in Their Own Land”, by anthropologist Arlie Russell Hochshild. Secondly, Mr Davies argues that there is now a lot of evidence to show that “story-telling” has the power to sway peoples’ opinions as much as statistics. Story-telling can be used just as well to accompany evidence-based politics and arguments as it can be abused by populists. Story-telling is what made the great wordsmiths, such as Winston Churchill, so successful; what these politicians are asking their listeners is not so much “do my words match up to reality?”, as “do my words mobilise you?”. Equally, argues Mr Davies, rationalists are lagging behind the fact that we have moved from a “verbal public sphere” to an “image-based” sphere, where photos, videos and the attendant social-media channels predominate. People have not become more emotional over time, they do not have more feelings than they used to; rather they now have an infinite variety of ways to express those feelings in real time, on smart-phones for instance. “Feeling has entered politics mainly for technological reasons,” argues Mr Davies, and populism is all about quick, unfiltered responses to events. As a riposte, rationalists can use infographics and data-visualisation as a way of presenting statistics and evidence, but, Mr Davies warns, these also risk “triggering” people into knee-jerk responses. Lastly, advises Mr Davies, we should cherish those institutions, imperfect though they may be, that aspire to objectivity and truth-telling. Free marketeers, for instance, might deride the BBC for its funding formula, relying as it does on a taxpayer levy, but these concerns should now be outweighed by its contribution to maintaining a reasonable consensus on what constitutes real facts and news—a consensus that has already largely broken down in America. As a quid pro quo, institutions have to be more obviously free of political influence than ever before. For a public broadcaster like the BBC, this means no longer appointing former politicians, such as Labour’s James Purnell, to top positions. It seems a reasonable trade-off to survive the post-truth world. If feelings have come to dominate politics to the detriment of good governance and evidence-led policy-making, then the rationalists need to reassert themselves; to show some emotion and take governance back.