JEREMY HUNT and Boris Johnson are on the hustings, travelling through Britain to seek support for their bids to succeed Theresa May as leader of the Conservative Party, and thus as prime minister. They are not trying to charm millions of voters, just the considerably more exclusive franchise of the Conservative Party’s membership. Whoever polls highest will be declared the winner on July 22nd and move into Downing Street the next day. To some this may seem an eccentric, even undemocratic way to pick the leader of an advanced democracy. But by precedent, the sole criterion to be prime minister is that he or she must command a majority in the House of Commons. So who are the members of the Conservative Party, and whom are they likely to pick?  All Britain’s main political parties have suffered a decline in membership in recent decades, but none more so than the Tories (see chart). In the 1950s they had nearly 3m members. Now they have about 160,000. They are unrepresentative of Britain: according to research from Queen Mary University of London, 86% of Tory members are middle class and 97% are white, whereas only 54% of Britons are middle class and 87% white. Fully 71% of Tory party members are men and 44% are over 65 years old, compared with 18% of the population as a whole. They are disproportionately concentrated in London and the south of England. These characteristics help to explain the political attitudes of the membership, particularly when it comes to Brexit. About 60% of those over 65 voted to leave the EU in the referendum of 2016, as did about two-thirds of Tory party members. Now, the overwhelming majority of members oppose holding a second referendum. According to a recent YouGov poll, the Tory membership is so dedicated to Brexit that 54% would be willing to destroy the party itself in order to achieve it. Equally, a majority would be happy to break up the United Kingdom to get Brexit—even though the official name of the Tories is the Conservative and Unionist Party. Members are more socially conservative than the average Tory voter and, on the economy, are more likely to be against any government redistribution. These are the leanings that Messrs Hunt and Johnson have to take into account. They may choose to tack to the political centre at a general election, but to get into Downing Street in the first place they will have to throw some very red meat to the activists. Thus Mr Johnson’s recent declaration Britain would leave the EU on October 31st, “do or die”, might horrify many voters, but the evidence suggests that it is exactly what party members want to hear. A no-deal Brexit holds no fear for many of them: according to the YouGov survey, 44% believe that such an outcome will win the Tories at least the next election. Little wonder, then, that Mr Johnson, who fronted the Leave campaign in 2016, remains the favourite.