IT IS 2019. The American president spends his “executive time” posting memes on Twitter. Video-streaming platforms are valued in the hundreds of billions of dollars. TikTok, an utterly baffling but hugely enjoyable app of very short, very weird videos, is taking the world by storm. Contemporary culture is dominated by the visual and the mass produced, and has been for years. And yet, prompted by a new exhibition of Japanese manga, newspapers are still asking whether modern visual culture has any place in museums. “I’m not knocking manga or its fans, but what has it got to do with the British Museum?” Jonathan Jones wrote in the Guardian. “What’s next—Rembrandt meets Dennis the Menace?” the Telegraph asked: “Is manga really as significant as Rodin and the Ancient Greeks?” The answers to these questions are, in order, everything, why not, and quite possibly.  That designated tastemakers pooh-pooh any sign of an old institution dabbling in something new is perhaps predictable. But it is precisely for that reason that the British Museum ought to be lauded for putting on this dynamic, exuberant and ambitious celebration of Japan’s comic-art narrative form. It somehow manages to strike the right balance for every type of visitor, from the utter novice to the knowledgeable fan. For the newbie there are instructions on how to read from right to left, how to decipher the codes embedded in the speech bubbles, and introductions to famous artists and important texts. For the long-time fan, original prints of canonical works will prove a big draw (pardon the pun), as will displays of the historical prints and fabrics that have influenced the modern form. For those, such as this reviewer, who fall somewhere in between—that is, with a passing acquaintance but nothing resembling expertise—it is an utter delight. The exhibition probes the historical roots of manga, with nods to Katsushika Hokusai, a famous artist and printmaker. It lays out the many genres and subgenres within the sprawling world of manga, and goes into satisfying detail on the cultural cross-pollination of American and Japanese comics. Were it all prints and information cards, the exhibition could still have been a sweet if underwhelming attempt at bringing mass culture into the museum. But it is in expanding beyond the art itself, into the experience, that it truly highlights the significance that some critics fail to see. Just as the Greeks created plays and texts and ways of thinking and seeing the world that continue to touch the lives of millions, so too has manga created a global culture that millions participate in. Some dress up as their favourite characters, buy merchandise, read fan comics and blogs (or indeed make fan-art). Others read or are touched by other things that have been influenced by manga, such as Pokémon, which started life as a video game, was adapted into manga, and later morphed into a global phenomenon that layered a virtual world over the real one. The best thing about the exhibition, however, is all the stuff that isn’t in it. Unlike an exhibition of Rembrandt, to take Mr Jones’s example, this show is an introduction, an enticement to fall down the deep rabbit hole of a different world of art and narrative and culture. That manga itself is mass-produced, inexpensive and easy to acquire on Amazon is an added bonus. “Manga” continues at the British Museum until August 26th