Even before arriving in London on June 3rd for a three-day state visit, President Donald Trump stirred controversy, weighing in with views on potential successors to Theresa May as prime minister. The visit itself will be an extravaganza of protests and pomp. It will also be a test of how “special” the relationship between America and Britain can remain in the face of serious strains. The president is coming at a febrile time in British politics. Mrs May is about to step down as Conservative party leader, and once Mr Trump leaves she will trigger the formal start of the race between at least a dozen candidates to replace her. Like the Tories, the Labour Party took a pounding in the recent European elections; it is also beset by allegations of anti-Semitism. The country’s divisions over Brexit look deeper than ever. In such circumstances a typical visiting head of state would strive to rise above it all with tact and diplomacy.  Not Mr Trump. On his previous working trip to Britain as president last July he embarrassed Mrs May with an interview in the Sun newspaper in which he criticised her position on Brexit and praised Boris Johnson, who had just resigned as foreign secretary. True to form, this time Mr Trump told the Sun shortly before his arrival that Mr Johnson, now front-runner in the race to be prime minister, would be “excellent” as leader. Once again he criticised Britain’s negotiating strategy for Brexit: “the UK allowed the European Union to have all the cards.” In an interview with the Sunday Times he went further, urging Britain to "walk away" if the EU refuses to meet its demands, and suggesting that Nigel Farage, the Brexit Party leader, should be involved in the negotiations. He also said he would "go all out" for a rapid trade deal with Britain and claimed that trade with America could more than make up for lost trade with the EU. As last time, too, protesters will be out in force, probably again with a giant inflatable of a baby Trump in a nappy. A few prominent figures are flagging their opposition to the visit—peevishly, critics say—by turning down their invitation to attend a state dinner on Monday. They include the Liberal Democrats’ leader, Vince Cable, and Labour’s Jeremy Corbyn, who object to Britain rolling out the red carpet for a “misogynist and racist”. The Speaker of the House of Commons, John Bercow, is also staying away—and did not invite the president to address Parliament (something Barack Obama, Bill Clinton and Ronald Reagan did). Despite the sense of déjà vu, this visit is a bigger deal than last year’s, in two respects. First, tensions are simmering between the two countries over issues that go to the core of their relationship. One is Iran. America has pulled out of the nuclear accord with Iran and is ratcheting up sanctions against it. Now it is twisting European allies’ arms over their efforts to enable trade to flow with the help of a new payments system called Instex. The Treasury last month warned the Europeans that efforts to circumvent sanctions could have “severe consequences, including a loss of access to the US financial system”. America is also warning its close ally about its possible use of 5G technology from Huawei, a Chinese telecoms giant with a well-established presence in the country. Last month Mike Pompeo, America’s secretary of state, warned that relying on Chinese 5G kit might put intelligence-sharing at risk. “What can Her Majesty’s government do to make sure sensitive technologies don’t become open doors for Beijing’s spymasters?” he said in a speech in London last month. “Insufficient security will impede the United States’ ability to share certain information with trusted networks.” British diplomats have long tended to downplay talk of the special relationship with America—except when it comes to security. Any erosion of trust on intelligence-sharing would be deeply damaging. Mr Trump will no doubt make his views clear on these issues, but he will also be determined to wallow in the pageantry of a state visit. That is the second reason why this time is different: such things are grand occasions. He is bringing not just the First Lady but all his four adult children to meet the Queen. So there will be warmth amid the wariness. The visit will culminate in events to mark the 75th anniversary of the D-Day landings, a reminder of what Britain and America can achieve when they stand shoulder to shoulder. Mr Trump likes the fact that Britain is one of a handful of NATO allies that meets the target of spending 2% of GDP on defence. Jeremy Hunt, the foreign secretary and another would-be prime minister, has said he favours a decisive increase in defence spending (“I think that’s great,” Mr Trump told the Sun). And with his characteristic modesty Mr Trump professes to love Britain: “I don’t imagine any other US president was closer to your great land.”