THE HEADLINES on Ivan Golunov’s articles make it clear that he may have made some enemies. One article pledges to explain “how officials, the security services, and bandits carve up the market for funeral services”. Others allege that the family of a vice-mayor “made billions and bought up mansions and apartments”, or promise to list “who’s making a killing on Moscow’s reconstruction”. As an investigative journalist for independent Russian media outlets, Mr Golunov developed a reputation for thorough shoe-leather reporting and scrupulous work with procurement databases to expose state corruption. On the afternoon of June 6th, Moscow police detained Mr Golunov in the city centre while he was walking to meet a source. The police claimed to have found a stash of drugs in his backpack, and released photos of a small drug lab supposedly discovered in his apartment. Mr Golunov has been booked on charges of selling narcotics, carrying a potential 10- to 20-year sentence. He was prevented from contacting anyone for more than 12 hours. After a sympathetic detective tipped off a friend of Mr Golunov’s, a lawyer arrived at last. Mr Golunov alleged that police had planted the drugs and beat him up. The police refused to let medical personnel document his wounds, though they deny any misbehaviour.  Mr Golunov’s editors at Meduza, an independent news site, believe his journalism is the reason for his arrest. “We know that Ivan has received threats in recent months, and we think we know from whom,” they wrote. Colleagues and friends describe Mr Golunov as a virtual teetotaller who obeyed the law scrupulously, to avoid giving the authorities excuses to harass him. “In the Russian reality, an investigative journalist even crosses the street with particular care: only on a green light, so there will be nothing to pin on him,” said Svetlana Reiter, a fellow investigative journalist. Meduza says that the handwriting on notes in police photographs does not appear to match Mr Golunov’s. Acquaintances told that site that they recognise only one of the photographs as his apartment. The brazenness of the charges is not a glitch. Instead, it highlights the increasing impunity of the Russian security services. Police are known for planting drugs to meet arrest quotas. Until now such tactics have been used against political opponents only in Chechnya, where Oyub Titiev, a human-rights activist, was sentenced in March to four years in prison on drug charges that observers called fabricated. Like Mr Titiev’s, Mr Golunov’s arrest is meant to send a message. “It’s a signal that they can do the same or worse with any of us,” said Pavel Kanygin of Novaya Gazeta, an independent newspaper. Journalists and supporters gathered on June 7th near the police headquarters for a series of one-man pickets, a tactic activists use to avoid a ban on protesting in groups without permission. Police detained at least seven of them—one by one—including Mr Kanygin. As police were hauling the protesters into police vans, President Vladimir Putin was striding on stage at the St Petersburg International Economic Forum, Russia’s yearly gathering of economic bigwigs. The atmosphere at this year’s forum has been marred by the arrest in February of Michael Calvey, a prominent American investor, on dubious fraud charges. Mr Putin touted Russia’s business climate and endorsed the investigation into Mr Calvey. “Just, legal decisions will be made,” Mr Putin insisted. The arrest of Mr Golunov suggests that in today’s Russia, lawlessness often masquerades as justice.