IN THE circumstances, President Donald Trump’s announcement on the evening of June 21st that he intended to nominate Mark Esper to be his defence secretary was as good as could be expected. Mr Esper, the current army secretary, would not be a distinguished occupant of the office held by Robert McNamara and Robert Gates. Aside from some odd jobs as a congressional staffer and in the Pentagon, the 55-year-old is best known as a successful former defence industry lobbyist. He has no significant foreign policy experience. Yet he has some credentials lacked by Patrick Shanahan, the acting secretary who will shortly leave the Pentagon: including a decade of active duty service in the army and influential admirers.  Mr Trump had previously announced his intention to nominate Mr Shanahan, a former Boeing executive, to become secretary permanently. Yet he refrained from doing so, as doubts about Mr Shanahan mounted. Though accommodating to the president (including in his support for siphoning billions off his own department’s budget in order to pay for some border fencing) he made no significant mark on the government during six months as acting successor to James Mattis. He was a relative non-entity in security discussions on Iran, North Korea and elsewhere, even as Mr Trump contemplated launching military strikes on the former. He resigned from the government this week after the Washington Post revealed serious incidents of domestic violence in Mr Shanahan’s family (His son beat up his ex-wife with a baseball bat). He was to be replaced, on the same acting basis, by Mr Esper. This will now complicate Mr Esper’s nomination. He cannot go through a Senate confirmation process for a job he is holding temporarily. He is therefore expected to be replaced as acting secretary of defence by the navy secretary, Richard Spencer. That would mean Mr Trump is set to have four defence secretaries in three years, a record rate of turnover. The administration’s current length of time without a defence secretary, over six months, is another record. (It also has no ambassador to the United Nations or secretary of the Department of Homeland Security, among other security-related jobs). Yet Mr Esper does at least look able to secure Senate confirmation. He was confirmed as army secretary by the Senate with a large majority and has admirers there, including Jim Inhofe, chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee. Whether Mr Esper could restore the primacy that the Pentagon, the federal government’s biggest department, has traditionally enjoyed in security decision-making is another matter. Since Mr Mattis resigned, in protest at Mr Trump, the Pentagon has been increasingly sidelined by the National Security Council, under John Bolton, and Secretary of State Mike Pompeo. Mr Trump was briefly persuaded to order an air strike on Iran under their belligerent guidance. The fact that Mr Esper graduated from West Point in the same class as Mr Pompeo suggests he might have a firm ally in the secretary of state. He might in that case also be expected to support him in Mr Pompeo’s emerging rivalry with Mr Bolton. Given the national security adviser’s particularly extreme bellicosity, that would probably be for the best. Yet the notion that the secretary of defence could play such as secondary role in cabinet politics is also indicative of how far the Pentagon has fallen in the pecking order since Mr Mattis left it.