THERE IS a particular genre of comedy in which an unremarkable man suddenly finds himself to be the only person in the world with some miraculous knowledge or power. He might have realised that he is stuck in a time loop (like Bill Murray in “Groundhog Day”), or gained the ability to fast-forward his life (like Adam Sandler in “Click”). Sometimes his gift is godly (such as Jim Carrey’s omnipotence in “Bruce Almighty”), and sometimes sinful (as for Ricky Gervais in “The Invention of Lying”). At first he marvels at his superpower. Then he abuses it. Eventually, he renounces it, having failed to woo a beautiful woman. To that genre belongs “Yesterday”, a new comedy written by Richard Curtis (of “Notting Hill” fame) and directed by Danny Boyle (an Oscar winner for “Slumdog Millionaire”). This hero’s gift is zany. Jack (Himesh Patel), a shelf-stacker and frustrated busker, wakes up after a traffic accident to find that nobody else has heard of the Beatles. He records every tune that he can remember, winning fans on local radio, then at concerts, and finally with a juicy recording deal in America. Lily James plays Ellie, his old friend and love interest, whom Jack alienates as he becomes (to borrow John Lennon’s phrase) more popular than Jesus.  Like “Groundhog Day” or “Bruce Almighty”, “Yesterday” gets most of its humour from the supernatural conceit, rather than its characters. The chemistry between ardent Jack and bashful Ellie is enough to keep the plot interesting, as the burgeoning superstar tries to win her over. But it would not carry a film without the Beatles premise. Nor does the patter among Jack’s friends and family produce much hilarity. There are few of the guffaw-inducing faux pas or witty ripostes that made Mr Curtis’s early work, such as “Blackadder” and “Four Weddings and a Funeral”, so entertaining. Debra (Kate McKinnon), Jack’s mercenary American manager, yields a few chuckles: she describes Jack’s own, non-Beatles, compositions as “simple but not charming”. Yet her character does little else than tempt Jack with “the poisoned chalice of fame and money”. (“In the name of money, stop!” she yells when he is on the verge of giving it all away.) Ed Sheeran makes a lengthy cameo as an insufferable version of himself, insisting that Jack should call his masterpiece “Hey Dude”, among other unhelpful suggestions. It is that sort of riffing on the Fab Four’s work that produces most of the laughs. When Jack first plays “Yesterday” to his friends, one of them remarks that it is hardly as good as Coldplay. His parents refer to his new piano ballad as “Leave It Be”. Jack himself struggles to remember what exactly Eleanor Rigby was doing in the church—a challenge that even Beatles aficionados will find tricky without looking up the lyrics. The film was made for that sort of fan. Mr Boyle has called it his “love letter to the Beatles and their music”. By coincidence, he and Mr Curtis—who had previously written “The Boat That Rocked”, a film about pirate radio stations in the 1960s—are standing next to each other on a commemorative version of the famous “Sgt. Pepper” album cover, which Sir Peter Blake, the original artist, redesigned for his 80th birthday in 2012. They have woven countless references to the songs into the script. Jack’s traffic accident occurs to the sound of the crashing piano chords from “A Day in the Life”. While fixing Jack’s teeth, his local dentist explains that he gets by with a little help from his friends. Jack’s first concert as Mr Sheeran’s supporting act is in Russia, and he opens with “Back in the U.S.S.R.”. (Extra keen viewers will even notice mentions of lesser-known tracks, such as “Maxwell’s Silver Hammer” and “Being for the Benefit of Mr Kite”.) Like any Beatles composition, there are a couple of profound moments among the fun. The most memorable is an unexpected appearance from a very important figure, who arrives to remind Jack that sometimes love is all you need. That poignant cameo alone is enough to make this essential viewing for any fan of the Fab Four. The other spine-tingling scene comes when a jealous Mr Sheeran challenges Jack, in front of his entourage, to write the best song possible in ten minutes. After the pop star comes up with something vapid about penguins, Jack sits at the piano to play “The Long and Winding Road”. Everyone is spellbound. As Jack points out earlier in the film, when his audience hears one of the songs for the first time, it is “like watching Leonardo da Vinci painting the Mona Lisa right in front of your bloody eyes”. This film is very different to the recent biopics of Freddie Mercury (“Bohemian Rhapsody”) and Elton John (“Rocketman”). But like those dramas, it is a paean to song-writing genius. The disbelief that Jack could compose so many brilliant tunes is a reminder of the improbability that four normal lads from Liverpool actually did produce them. At some point Lennon, Paul McCartney, George Harrison and Ringo Starr were all exasperated nobodies, who gradually astounded the world with their songs. Lucky for the world that they did—and that it will never wake up to find their records have disappeared from the shelf. “Yesterday” is released worldwide on June 28th