ON MAY 31st a gunman walked into a municipal office in Virginia Beach and slaughtered 12 people, most of them colleagues he had worked with for years, before he was killed in a gun battle with police. The killer—whom the police have referred to by name only once, part of a move to strip mass shooters of their notoriety—used two semi-automatic handguns, both bought legally. He used a silencer and extended ammunition magazines, which are also legal in Virginia. It seems likely that his presence, heavily armed, in the building, was above board as well. Thanks to the state’s liberal concealed-carry laws anyone with a licence can walk into a restaurant, shop or office in Virginia carrying a gun. Four days later, Ralph Northam, Virginia’s governor, said he would recall lawmakers to the state Capitol in June to debate a package of gun-control measures. It included, he said, a ban on silencers and high capacity ammunition magazines and new powers for local governments to limit guns in city buildings.  “It is wrong, it is outrageous, it is unforgivable to turn our municipal centers, our schools, our churches and synagogues and mosques, into battlefields,” he said at a news conference on June 4th. “I will be asking for votes and laws, not thoughts and prayers.” Mr Northam, a Democrat who has long been an advocate of stricter gun controls, said he also wanted lawmakers to vote on bills to compel gun buyers to undergo universal background checks, to limit gun purchases to one a month, and to allow authorities to seize the weapons of those deemed a threat. He said that while mass shootings made headlines, far more Virginians were killed in smaller incidents—1,028 in 2017 alone. He cited the case of a little girl who was shot dead in a park last week. Twelve years after a student at Virginia Tech killed 32 and wounded 17 with two semi-automatic pistols in a 10-minute rampage in 2007, Virginia has yet to pass any of the stringent gun regulations that have cut gun deaths elsewhere. It is one of 17 states in which more people are killed by guns than car crashes, according to the Centre for American Progress, a think tank. In 2012 Virginia’s lawmakers repealed a law, passed in the wake of the Virginia Tech massacre, which prevented the purchase of more than one gun per person per month. Mr Northam, a doctor who has described treating children and soldiers for bullet wounds, made gun-control a big issue in his campaign for the governorship in 2017. But his efforts have so far failed. Republicans, who hold narrow majorities in Virginia’s House and Senate, have blocked all such efforts, including a push, in January, to ban high-capacity magazines. “They have never received a fair hearing”, Mr Northam said. “I want these pieces of common sense gun safety legislation to get to the floor and let these individuals elected by you, the people, to come to the floor and cast their vote.” One Republican lawmaker did indicate that he was willing to debate gun controls. Addressing a group of protesters who had gathered outside his office to call for gun controls, Thomas Norment, the majority leader in the state Senate, said “there ought to be a meaningful discussion legislatively and in the community about gun control.” But he is also reported to have told the protestors that “nothing would have helped us at Virginia Beach”. The House Speaker, Kirk Cox, meanwhile, described Mr Northam’s announcement as “hasty and suspect when considered against the backdrop of the last few months”—apparently alluding to revelations in February that Mr Northam had donned blackface as a student. Mr Northam may have more luck with his gun-control push next year. Since 2016, when Hillary Clinton won Virginia, Democrats have stormed elections in the state, taking its three elective offices—governor, lieutenant-governor and attorney-general—and three congressional seats. In November, all seats in the general assembly will be up for election. With Republicans holding a two-seat majority in the House and Senate, Democrats are hoping to flip both.