CURIOUS VOTING lineups marked three of the four rulings the Supreme Court handed down on June 17th. The arrangement of justices in Virginia House of Delegates v Bethune-Hill, a 5-4 decision dealing a death-blow to a racially biased gerrymander of Virginia’s state legislative map, was particularly notable. The majority opinion was written by Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg and signed by two fellow liberals, Elena Kagan and Sonia Sotomayor. But two of the most conservative jurists on the court, Justices Neil Gorsuch and Clarence Thomas, rounded out the majority. The dissenting quartet comprised three conservatives and Justice Stephen Breyer, who usually votes with the liberals. The matter in Bethune-Hill differs from that of two partisan gerrymandering cases set to be decided before the end of June. Those challenges, Lamone v Benisek and Rucho v Common Cause, ask the justices to do something they have never done: impose a limit on political parties’ efforts to entrench power by drawing district lines that guarantee them a lopsided proportion of seats in Congress or in state legislatures. The Virginia case concerns racial gerrymandering, the practice of unconstitutionally moving voters in and out of districts based on their race, which the Supreme Court has policed for decades. By scuttling a racially gerrymandered map that Republicans adopted in 2011, the Supreme Court sets the stage for a possible Democratic takeover of Virginia’s Senate and House of Delegates when Virginians vote on November 5th 2019. For Republicans, such a loss could come with interest. If the Democrats prevail, they will control the next round of redistricting in 2021 after population data from the 2020 census are reported.  The substantive legal question in Bethune-Hill was whether Virginia Republicans violated the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment when they packed black voters into a number of majority-minority districts. The House of Delegates claims it was only trying to comply with the Voting Rights Act of 1965 in sketching a map that allowed minorities to elect their choice of candidates. But the challengers saw the House’s target of 55% black voters in these districts as excessive and designed to dilute black voting influence in surrounding areas. In their ruling on June 17th, the Supreme Court did not breathe a word on the heart of the matter. Instead, the five justices in the majority dismissed the House of Delegates’ appeal on the grounds the body does not have “standing” to sue. Justice Ginsburg began by citing a clear provision of Virginia law: “[a]uthority and responsibility for representing the state’s interests in civil litigation...rest exclusively with the state’s attorney-general”. Since Mark Herring, Virginia's attorney-general, declined to appeal a lower-court ruling striking down the gerrymandered map and appointing a special master to draw up a fair replacement, the case is closed. Virginia’s House of Delegates may not open it. And as Justice Sotomayor observed during the oral argument, the gerrymandered map, “at best”, is a product of “the legislature as a whole” or “the people of Virginia”—not of the House of Delegates alone. Justice Ginsburg used this idea to respond to the House’s second argument for standing: that the House is independently harmed by the revised electoral maps and should have the right to sue, whatever the attorney-general’s plans may be. Not so, the majority responded. Redistricting is not the sole province of the House—it is entrusted to the General Assembly as a whole, and the House is only half of that institution. In his dissent, Justice Samuel Alito explained why the House of Delegates has the right to sue. It should “really go without saying”, he wrote, that changes to an electoral map “have an important impact on the overall work of the body”. If it were not for the significant effects redrawn districts have on “the composition of a legislature” and “the things that a legislature does”, legislators would not take such pains in “drawing, contesting and defending districting plans”. It is “really quite astounding”, he wrote, to “suggest otherwise”. And the question of who serves in an institution matters greatly to it: “Does a string quartet have an interest in the identity of its cellist? Does a basketball team have an interest in the identity of its point guard? Does a board of directors have an interest in the identity of its chairperson?” Clearly, the dissent concludes, “the invalidation of the House’s redistricting plan and its replacement with a court-ordered map would cause the House to suffer a ‘concrete’ injury”, the basic requirement for standing. Aside from the political repercussions from the ruling in Bethune-Hill—enhanced prospects for a Democratic sweep of Virginia’s General Assembly in the autumn—there are two more subtle implications. The first concerns the Supreme Court’s legitimacy. The institution has never been divorced from politics, but nomination battles over President Donald Trump’s two Supreme Court picks have cast the institution in an increasingly ideological—and partisan—light. Bethune-Hill shows that justices are capable of voting against the interest of the party of the president who nominated them—at least occasionally. The ruling will give Chief Justice John Roberts something to point to when he insists (as he often does) that the justices “serve one nation”, not “one party or interest”. But by signing onto Justice Alito’s dissent, the chief will have a hard time writing or joining an opinion in Rucho and Lamone that dismisses the impact of partisanship in redistricting. In the Rucho oral argument in April, Chief Justice Roberts expressed scepticism that “partisan identification” is the “only basis on which people vote”. Electoral results “can change dramatically” depending on other factors, such as “the particular appeal of individual candidates” or who is at the top of the ticket. This sentiment clashes with the view in Justice Alito’s dissent that an electoral map’s lines—who votes in which district—obviously have “institutional and legislative consequences”. It isn’t clear whether the chief’s decision to sign Justice Alito’s dissent in Bethune-Hill translates into a willingness to tame the gerrymander—but that mystery should be resolved in a matter of days.