ONE OF Elizabeth Warren’s most formative political tangles, which prompted her transition from law professor at Harvard to senator from Massachusetts, occurred in 2005 over a bankruptcy-reform bill. Ms Warren was concerned about the repercussions for middle-class Americans, especially women, who would have a harder time filing for bankruptcy as a result of the bill. A particular target of her ire was Joe Biden, then a senator from Delaware and one of the bill’s strongest backers. “Senators like Joe Biden should not be allowed to sell out women in the morning and be heralded as their friend in the evening,” she wrote at the time. To this day the two are seen as ideological foes. Ms Warren appeals to a fire-breathing leftish section of the party, while Mr Biden has made a concerted effort to court moderate Democratic voters. Yet both contenders for the Democratic nomination released ambitious, detailed environmental plans within hours of one another on June 4th. The striking similarity of their plans shows how the politics of climate change has evolved from a niche issue among Democrats to one of great urgency.  The American environmental activists who called for a Green New Deal, particularly Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, a freshman congresswoman from New York, can claim some credit for this change. A series of recent calamitous weather events—fires, polar vortices, hurricanes and floods—have also helped. This week, 17% of Democrats surveyed by YouGov on behalf of The Economist said the environment was the most important issue for them. That is second only to health care, the chief issue of last year’s mid-term elections, which captures the attention of 22%. The Green New Deal has two problems. The first is that it is only skeletally sketched, with handwaving in lieu of details for the massive economic reorganisation it envisages. The second is that it includes a gratuitous list of progressive measures—including a federal jobs guarantee, a universal basic income, and universal health insurance—only tangentially related to climate policy. Many top-tier Democratic candidates, who would no doubt balk at such sweeping changes, signed on to the Green New Deal nonetheless. Yet with the release of Mr Biden’s and Ms Warren’s plans, both less quixotic and more scrupulous than the earlier sketch, the debate has been much improved. Mr Biden had been one of the few leading presidential contenders to resist endorsing the Green New Deal. He would instead release his own climate plan, he said. An adviser’s comment that Mr Biden was seeking a “middle ground” sparked fears among activists that his would be a mishmash package that offered carbon taxes for liberals and fracking subsidies for conservatives. But Mr Biden’s plan is ambitious. He would like the American economy to be a net-zero emitter of carbon pollution by 2050. This would be achieved in two ways, including executive orders and actions (taking Barack Obama’s playbook for climate policy and applying it much more aggressively) that would bypass Congress. The second way, which would require legislation, is through a $1.7trn in federal funding for what Mr Biden calls, in a Sandersesque turn of phrase, a “Clean Energy Revolution”. There are other sensible proposals—finally developing the high-speed rail that America lacks, and reforming zoning to encourage denser, more efficient cities—scattered throughout. One innovation, which seems to play to Mr Biden’s strengths as a foreign-policy expert, is to threaten tariffs on countries without adequate environmental policies. America accounts for only 15% of the world’s greenhouse-gas emissions. China accounts for nearly twice that. Mr Biden’s language on this—he says he wants “strong new measures to stop other countries from cheating on their climate commitments”—sounds almost Trumpian. Given that Mr Biden is the clear front-runner for the Democratic nomination, this perhaps paves the way for a future attack on the president for focusing his trade actions on the wrong problem. Climate change is a much more serious problem for America’s future than illegal immigration or bilateral trade deficits, Mr Biden could credibly argue. Ms Warren’s plan has a Trumpian echo, too: it was released under the banner of “economic patriotism”. It represents, according to her, “my commitment to a Green New Deal”—one that applies the analogy of wartime mobilisation during Franklin Roosevelt’s presidency to modern times. Hers is straightforward industrial policy—calling for $2trn in investments over the next 10 years for research and development—with three-quarters of that vast sum spent through federal procurement. Ms Warren thinks that all that production would generate 1m jobs, which would pay at least $15 per hour and guarantee 12 weeks of paid family and medical leave. About $100bn of the money would be spent on a “Green Marshall Plan”, dedicated to exporting the clean-energy technology developed in America to other countries. The curious thing about both proposals is that they dodge the question of a price on carbon, whether through direct taxation or a cap-and-trade scheme. Though research into more cost-effective technology for carbon capture and sequestration or solar power is helpful and necessary, a carbon price incorporating the negative externality of pollution would seem a simple first step. Mr Biden’s plan only nebulously nods towards “the principles that polluters must bear the full cost of the carbon pollution they are emitting” and says nothing more on the subject. It goes unmentioned in Ms Warren’s plan. Both candidates presumably employ clever policy staffers who know about carbon pricing—but they also employ strategists who note that carbon taxes are quite easily dismissed as energy taxes by political opponents. The lessons of 2010, when a Democratic effort to create a carbon market spectacularly collapsed despite unified control of government leading to an electoral backlash, seem to have been well-remembered.