Job Title: Data Researcher Location: London, WC2N 6HT  Hours: 35 hours per week - Monday to Friday, 10am to 6pm Wage: Competitive Contract: Fixed Term (exact dates to be confirmed, dependent on start date) Job descriptionEconomist Films is the award-winning factual production arm of the global current-affairs newspaper, The Economist. Economist Films captures The Economist’s globally curious outlook in short, mind-stretching films, which offer clear, sharp analysis of a subject, presented in a compelling and digestible way. On average our films are viewed 30m times across 15 platforms every month. They are distributed via the publisher’s editorial channels and social platforms including Twitter, YouTube, Facebook and Instagram IGTV. They can also be viewed on Apple TV, Amazon Fire, Google Chromecast, Android TV and ROKU, among others. Economist Films are looking for a Data Researcher to join the production team. You will be helping to produce The Economist’s twice-weekly “Daily Watch”, including short-form documentaries, animated films and explainers, and you will be an integral part of the team tasked with developing and launching a new weekly format for our YouTube channel. We are looking for a candidate with the ability to research data-driven elements for all of the above in collaboration with other members of the production team, and to source and help produce data visualisations and infographics. You should be able to visualise on-screen graphics, in order to then hand over to a specialised designer. The ideal candidate will also be well-read with a broad general knowledge that reflects The Economist’s content, including current affairs, culture, business and technology. You will need to be able to learn quickly in this unique environment. An interest in film and on-screen data representation is essential, as is the ability to demonstrate excellence in researching and analysing data, excellent written and spoken communication, numeracy and literacy skills, creativity and journalistic judgment. Role Responsibility Main duties Desirable skills and experienceSkills in some or all of: data-mining/scraping; statistical packages and programming languages such as R, Stata and pandas or scikit-learn in Python; databases and SQL; visualisation tools like Adobe Illustrator, AfterEffects, D3.js and QGIS. A keen understanding of global politics and economics. Particular emphasis will be placed on identifying the primary points of journalistic interest in a complex dataset, and conveying them clearly and concisely for a general audience. To apply, please send your CV and cover letter to hello@economistfilms.com, before Friday 19th July 2019. The Economist Group values diversity. We are committed to equal opportunities and creating an inclusive environment for all our employees. We welcome applicants regardless of ethnic origin, national origin, gender, race, colour, religious beliefs, disability, sexual orientation or age.