ONE OF the magical things about Pixar’s “Toy Story” films is the way they balance the comfort of the old and the shock of the new. The series’ first instalment, released in 1995, was also the first ever feature film to be rendered solely using three-dimensional computer-generated imagery (CGI), so it was as cutting-edge as cinema could be. But “Toy Story” was also an ode to sunlit childhoods, with such vintage toys as Mr Potatohead and Slinky Dog. Its lead character was Woody (voiced by Tom Hanks), a cowboy rag doll manufactured in the 1950s, and there weren’t many children playing with those in 1995. In the series’ fourth episode, “Toy Story 4”, the animation is more photorealistic than ever. Images of fairground lights and muddy rainwater rushing down gutters, for instance, are indistinguishable from footage shot with a camera. But, on this occasion, the film’s technical innovation is outweighed by its love of the past. Set largely in a quaint town of parks and carnivals, “Toy Story 4” never acknowledges that children now play with phones and tablets as much as they play with dolls, or that the toys they enjoy are often tied into “The Avengers”, “Star Wars”, “Harry Potter” and “Pokémon”. The setting also seems to be devoid of security cameras and webcams. How else could so many sentient toys scurry so cavalierly around playgrounds and along highways, day and night, without anyone noticing?  The plot has a retro ring to it, too: in many respects, it is the same old “Toy Story”. The film begins with Woody realising again that his owner likes another toy more than she likes him. In the 1995 version, the owner was Andy and the usurper was Buzz Lightyear (Tim Allen). In the 2019 version, the owner is Bonnie, and the favoured toy is, well, all of them except Woody: when Bonnie constructs imaginary towns, she leaves him in the cupboard. If that weren’t humiliating enough, she fashions a new toy (Tony Hale) out of a white plastic spork and names him Forky. He believes that he is a piece of cutlery, not a toy, just as Buzz believed he was an astronaut. And when Forky absconds from the family’s campervan during a driving holiday, Woody goes after him, just as he went after Buzz. Soon, his search-and-rescue mission leads him to an antique shop where he hopes to find Bo Peep (Annie Potts), his love interest in the first two films. Instead, he finds Gabby Gabby (Christina Hendricks), a doll who is planning to revitalise herself via the toy equivalent of organ harvesting. Considering how much of the film unfolds in an antique shop, it’s conceivable that one of the screenplay’s many drafts—there are ten credited screenwriters—may have admitted that toys just aren’t as central to childhood as they once were. The shop-owner even lets her granddaughter take Woody away when she finds him on the floor because, she says, “nobody ever buys the toys.” But the film-makers don’t have the courage to confront their characters’ obsolescence—or, for that matter, their films’ obsolescence. A few years after “Toy Story 3” came out, a rival cartoon, “The Lego Movie”, sketched a much sharper and more accurate picture of how modern children play. What “Toy Story 4” opts for instead are the usual breakneck chases, death-defying leaps, snappy catchphrases, emotional reunions and nostalgic, warm images of America at its most wholesome. That doesn’t mean it isn’t enjoyable. Even if it is weaker than the previous “Toy Story” episodes, the film is still a hugely endearing and consistently funny family adventure—and that can’t be said of many films which are the fourth in a series, animated or otherwise. What “Toy Story 4” offers, though, is the sentimental pleasure of getting a favourite old plaything from the attic, rather than the thrill of unwrapping something new. “Toy Story 4” is released worldwide on June 21st