With all world religions, there are strains between the ancient heartland and the periphery. A Catholic campus in the American Mid-West feels different from the cloisters of the Vatican; the Buddhism embraced by Californian beach-goers lacks the rigour of a monastery in Thailand or Tibet. But in Islam, tensions of this kind, and the way they are resolved, can literally be a matter of life or death. At least 80 respected scholars and teachers of the Muslim faith, from many countries but mostly Anglophone ones, have lent their names to a plea to the Saudi authorities. It urges the kingdom to spare the lives of three well-known figures in the world of Islam. The trio have been incarcerated on “terrorism” charges since 2017. They had refused to back the kingdom’s diplomatic and economic blockade of neighbouring Qatar, at a time when this was  becoming a litmus-test of loyalty and securing the support of prominent and mildly independent-minded imams seemed to have become a high priority for the regime. Prosecutors want the death penalty, and unconfirmed reports indicate they might be dispatched when the holy month of Ramadan ends on June 4th.  Best-known of the three is Salman al-Ouda, a religious teacher who has built up a global audience (with about 14m Twitter followers), having first gained prominence in the 1990s when he challenged the kingdom’s alliance with America against Saddam Hussein’s Iraq. In 1999 he emerged from a five-year jail term as a defender of the regime and an advocate of Sunni-Shia dialogue. For a while he was able to teach and act freely; in 2006 he attracted a big, enthusiastic audience in London.  Also facing execution are Awad al-Qarni, a preacher, academic and author, and Ali al-Omari, a popular broadcaster. So what sort of people have been courageous enough to raise their voices in support of the trio, in defiance of the huge influence that Saudi Arabia and its austere brand of Sunni Islam can exercise in almost every corner of the Muslim world? For any mosque, institute or faculty that hopes one day to gain Saudi funding, backing such a document comes at a price. And in other Middle Eastern countries such as Jordan, Bahrain and Egypt, criticism of Saudi policies can end in prosecution or worse. The answer to that question provides a revealing snapshot of the state of global Islam. Virtually none of the signatories is based in a Muslim country. Yet among those who enjoy the freedom of the Western world, the theological range is remarkably broad. To explain this, it helps to understand the categories into which Sunni Islam’s main exponents fall. There are those who follow the Muslim Brotherhood, a movement that aspires, usually peacefully, to shift both society and its governance in an Islamic direction. Then there are traditionalists, those less concerned with politics but who see Islam’s accumulated body of law and teaching as the only cure for the “bad theology” which inspires terrorism. A third category are Salafis who prefer to go back to the basic axioms of faith and life laid down by Muhammad and his immediate successors; some Salafis are aligned with the Saudi regime, others are a bit more liberal, and some are ruthless jihadists. Among the people now appealing for the lives of the incarcerated trio, there are plenty of Brotherhood-minded scholars. One would expect that, given the poisonous standoff between the Saudis and the perceived Brotherhood stronghold of Qatar, the country which the trio had impertinently refused to condemn. But more surprisingly, the appeal was initiated by traditionalist scholars, a camp which enjoys the respect of Western governments because of its eloquent critique of terrorism. The traditionalists don’t often intervene directly in earthly affairs, particularly when it comes to Saudi Arabia; this is a rare exception. The document’s prime movers include Faraz Rabbani, a popular Muslim teacher of south Asian origin who studied for a long time in Jordan and Syria before settling in Canada. That is a classic traditionalist profile. Also on the list are some liberal Salafis, a couple of non-Muslims who are respected scholars of Islam and at least one Shia Muslim. Given the rifts within the Muslim world--especially since the Arab Spring, which triggered murderous feuds between Brothers, Salafis and traditionalists--it is quite impressive to see such a diverse list of names on a single piece of paper. On the other hand, there are some striking gaps. Some of the most prominent figures in Western-based Islam are absent from the list, although their students and mentees do appear, possibly with their mentors’ discreet permission. (Lecturers from one of the West’s leading seminaries, Zaytuna College in California, are on the list but its founder, Hamza Yusuf, is not.) British signatories include Sulaiman Gani, a south London imam who forced ex-prime minister David Cameron to apologise for calling him extremist. But the leaders of Britain’s biggest mosques are noticeably missing. Whatever the exact line-up, the appeal enjoys the approval of Mr al-Ouda’s American-based son, Abdullah, an academic scholar now based at Georgetown University. He believes the document carries real moral power, exactly because it challenges the Saudis’ claimed monopoly on Muslim wisdom. “The Saudi government is always concerned about its Islamic authority, they want to tell the West that they alone have the legitimate authority to speak about Islam.” It was in that spirit, he noted, that the kingdom in recent days hosted a conference with the paradoxically-chosen topic of “moderate Islam”, organised by the Saudi-backed Muslim World League. Jonathan Brown, an American signatory and convert to Islam who is a professor at Georgetown, said he hoped the appeal would lay bare the counter-productiveness of Saudi Arabia’s current policy. For as long as they were at liberty, the independent but broadly loyal views of teachers like Mr al-Qarni and Mr al-Ouda were a kind of advertisement for the kingdom’s fractionally loosening atmosphere. Capital punishment would have the opposite effect. It remains hard to predict whether the executions will take place; there has been no official verdict yet. But events could unfold quickly.  If they do happen, the diverse luminaries of Western-based Islam will come together not in polite supplication but in quiet horror. (Western governments, to judge by their reaction to some recent executions, including that of 37 “spy suspects” and protesters in April, will express disapproval but not too loudly.) Meanwhile the gap between centre and the periphery will yawn wider than ever.