SINCE ITS domestication more than 6,000 years ago, the grapevine has become one of the world’s most valuable crops. Although grapevines produce a great many foods including table grapes, raisins, preserves and cooked leaves, archaeological evidence makes it clear that wine came very early on. Yet it has remained mysterious whether the grapes crushed to make wine long ago were at all similar to those that are crushed in wineries today. New work led by Jazmín Ramos-Madrigal at the University of Copenhagen and Nathan Wales at the University of York published this week in Nature Plants reveals that the differences were exceptionally small and that, in some cases, the grapes were identical. Like many flowering plants, grapevines can reproduce asexually. This means that instead of depending upon a male plant fertilising a female plant through pollen transfer whereby the genes of the two plants are mixed together, grapevines can effectively be cloned. This is done using techniques like planting the shoots of a healthy vine in soil or grafting one vine onto another. This has made it possible for vineyards to grow grapes with identical genes year after year and thus produce wines from different years that are very similar in flavour. What has remained unclear until now is the length of time that specific grapevines have been cloned in such a manner.  Dr Ramos-Madrigal and Dr Wales examined the genetics of 28 grape seeds that have been uncovered at archaeological sites in France in recent years. Eight of these seeds were from the medieval period that ran from 850 years ago to 1,600 years ago, 19 were from days of the Roman era between 1,600 and 2,200 years ago and one of them was from the Iron Age around 2,500 years ago. Since Roman texts written by the philosopher Pliny the Elder describe practices like grafting in association with grapevines, Dr Ramos-Madrigal and Dr Wales expected to find some similarities between modern grapes and those of grapes harvested over 2,000 years ago. They did. An initial analysis conducted with a team of colleagues revealed that all of the seeds came from grapes harvested from vines that had been domesticated rather than those collected from the wild. This made sense since both the Roman and medieval sites showed no evidence of foraging taking place in general. With this information at hand, the researchers ran a more detailed analysis to try and discern which grape varietals ancient wine makers were working with. Dr Ramos-Madrigal and Dr Wales found very close genetic relationships between several of their Roman seeds and grape varieties like Amigne, Humagne Blanc and Mondeuse Blanche that are commonly grown in the mountains of Switzerland today. This proved fascinating because historians have long argued that the relationship between Amigne grapes and the Romans was strictly etymological since “amoenus” is Latin for “delicious.” The similar genetics of these Swiss grapes and those grown by the Romans hints that, rather than just give these berries their name, the Romans gave them their current growing location too. The team also found relationships between Roman seeds and the modern Syrah grape and the Pinot Noir grape. And one medieval seed was revealed to be a perfect genetic match to Savagnin Blanc, another Swiss varietal that is widely harvested annually in the Jura mountains. This suggests that this specific grape has been consistently cloned by human hands for at least nine centuries. While a great many things, including weather, temperature, harvesting time and the materials used in the fermenting process itself can shape the taste of wine in significant ways, it would seem that the Romans knew a good tipple when they found it.