IN RECENT decades, the word “Democrat” has become synonymous with progressive economics and “Republican” with fiscal conservatism. Those on the left are believed to be in favour of big government—high social spending, generous welfare and an ambitious regulatory scope—and those on the right opposed. This view is not entirely accurate. According to a new study of voter attitudes in 2019, Republicans are more positive about state intervention than conventional wisdom suggests, but the party is divided. Lower-income Republicans have much more progressive attitudes on economics than wealthy members of their party. This should enable enterprising Democratic leaders to experiment with new ways of appealing to Republicans, especially those who changed their allegiance from Barack Obama to Donald Trump in 2016. The study comes from the Democracy Fund Voter Study Group, a collection of public opinion researchers. Lee Drutman, Vanessa Williamson and Felicia Wong, political scientists, found that economic attitudes among Americans affiliated with the Republican Party are deeply divided by income level, with lower-income Republicans holding more progressive economic views. Factoring in only economic preferences—for raising the minimum wage, allowing workers to unionise and enacting government policies that decrease economic inequality—a significant share of Republicans would look like Democrats. “About 19% of Republicans held economic policy positions closer to the average Democrat than the average Republican”, say the authors, while “just 9% of Democrats held economic positions closer to the average Republican”.  There are many Republicans an astute Democrat could target, they reckon. Only 71% of “economically left Republicans”—who make up about 7% of the electorate overall—have pledged their support for Mr Trump in 2020, compared to 90% of economically right-leaning Republicans. Furthermore, according to the report, Democrats made gains among left-leaning independents in the 2018 mid-terms which could amount to a one percentage point increase in vote share next year. Though small, this increase would have been more than enough to tip the scales against Mr Trump in Midwestern states in 2016. Candidates including Elizabeth Warren (pictured), a senator from Massachusetts, are betting that they can win these voters by putting class struggle rather than identity at the forefront of their campaigns. Ms Warren has focused her campaign on a tax on the super-wealthy, reforming the campaign finance system and corporate tax-dodging, for example. Last week, she unveiled a plan specifically designed to appeal to disaffected voters in the heartland. Her “Plan for Economic Patriotism” promises to deliver “faster growth, stronger American industry, and more good American jobs” instead of catering to companies that have “no particular allegiance to America”. Her patriotic messaging could tug at the nationalistic heartstrings Mr Trump strummed in 2016. To succeed, Ms Warren’s approach relies on the de-emphasis of the politics of race. Anti-immigrant attitudes had a much bigger influence on Americans’ vote choice in 2016 than economic attitudes did. The odds that Mr Trump—who began his last campaign with a rhetorical assault on Mexican immigrants—will continue to rely on dog-whistle politics is high. On June 17th, he tweeted a proposal to expel millions of immigrants without documentation. The following day, when he launched his re-election campaign he mentioned immigrants, his border wall or immigration reform at least 20 times. By keeping issues of race and immigration on voters’ minds, Mr Trump would decrease the chance of a class-based message breaking through. But if 2016 was about how Republicans exploited social polarisation and last year’s mid-terms were about how Democrats exploited attitudes toward health care, the 2020 election could be decided at least in part by Republicans’ divide on economic attitudes. Will Elizabeth Warren get the opportunity to try? This week, a survey of 1,500 Americans conducted on behalf of The Economist by YouGov, a polling firm, found that 26% of the party’s primary voters prefer Joe Biden, the former vice-president, over any other candidate. But Ms Warren is on an upward swing. YouGov's poll was the second one in which Ms Warren polled even or higher than Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont. And her position may improve again after she appears in the first Democratic primary debate on June 26th.