IN SCOTLAND, between the Ochil Hills and the River Devon, lies Dollar. Etymologically, the town’s name is thought to have come from dol, a Pictish word for “field”, or doilleir, a Gaelic word meaning “dark and gloomy”. They rely on music here to lift the mist, as in settlements throughout Scotland’s rugged hinterland. The tunes are often traditional folk numbers, played on fiddles, the piano, the accordion and the clarsach (bagpipes) in cosy pubs. In short, Dollar is an unlikely home for a jazz talent. Yet Fergus McCreadie, a 22-year-old, is leading a new generation of Scottish jazz musicians. He combines swing and syncopation with ambitious improvisation, and blends these jazz elements with the splendid melodies of the sort conjured by folk players. They have the ability to bring both laughter and tears to their listeners, Mr McCreadie says, and the splendour of folk songs lies in their simplicity and conviction.  To some, Mr McCreadie thinks, jazz can sound “lame and twee”—or, worse still, “horrible and mental”. “Some jazz musicians are guilty of forgetting that the most important thing in music is the melody,” he reckons. These few notes are what people whistle on the way to work or hum in the shower, but in their pursuit of cleverness, jazz musicians can end up playing anguished cascades of notes that even they themselves do not appear to enjoy. His music is intended as a corrective, and he also hopes to capture the arresting topography of his home town. “You can take the guy out of the countryside,” he says, cringing slightly, “but you can’t take the countryside out of the guy.” Mr McCreadie released “Turas” (Gaelic for “journey”), his debut album, in April 2018. Piano, drums and bass combine to transport listeners up crag and down misty glen, with musical flurries the like of blustery winds—one critic described it as “Erik Satie on Islay malt”. On “The Culearn Mill”, the first track, Mr McCreadie steadily builds his theme before unleashing animated solos. Many listeners would recognise the patient precision of Oscar Peterson, the “Maharaja of the keyboard”, and the airy sustain of Bill Evans; later songs demonstrate a harmonic experimentation akin to Keith Jarrett. Mr McCreadie explores the safe ground before leaping to far-away keys, a move that would sound a mess under a lesser talent. It is a technique that Tommy Smith, the founder of the Scottish National Jazz Orchestra, describes as “virtuosic and high in emotional depth”. His fellow bandmates are attentive in their accompaniment. Sensitive percussion mirrors the rise and fall of Mr McCreadie’s musical leadership, but confidently sets the pace of the album as it makes its way from ballads to up-tempo foot-tappers. Sometimes the bass carries the melody; sometimes it lingers in the background. Each track is characterised by an appealing groove. The relative youth of the Scottish jazz scene may explain this experimentation. London and New York have a century of convention that musicians must learn and respect; Glasgow has only offered formal training in jazz for a decade. Mr McCreadie is a recent graduate of the Royal Conservatoire of Scotland, and is part of a community that is committed and open to new ideas and influences. They appreciate each other’s musicianship and share that joy with increasingly enthusiastic audiences. Indeed, Mr McCreadie plays as a sideman in two other Scottish combos, each at opposite ends of the jazz spectrum. In the rhythm section behind Matt Carmichael, a saxophonist, his style is more that of the time-honoured session player. In Graham Costello’s collective, Strata, anything goes—from discordant bashes of the keys to muted strings. Now Mr McCreadie is almost ready to lay down a second album and, in preparation for recording, the musician will resume his countryside hermitage. Familiar sights and sounds will move his fingertips, and lead to a collection of new compositions mostly without names (he admits to having great difficulty finding titles for his tunes, and has even resorted to Google Maps for inspiration). In recent years jazz has fused with other genres, particularly techno and electronica; that it has incorporated some Gaelic cheer is pure barry.