A SUPERTANKER LOADED with oil headed east from the Strait of Gibraltar into the Mediterranean, bound for Greece, just before midnight on August 18th. Nothing unusual in that—some 120,000 vessels pass through the strait each year, carrying a third of the world’s oil and gas. But the Iranian-flagged Adrian Darya 1 was no ordinary tanker. Just days earlier she had been renamed and reflagged, with fresh paint covering her old identity, Grace 1. Those actions accompanied the vessel’s release from over a month of detention in Gibraltar, an overseas territory of Britain. The episode not only marks the latest chapter in the increasingly bitter struggle between Iran and America—which made a final effort to seize the ship hours before she set sail—but also highlights Britain’s increasingly strained effort to balance its Iran policy between American belligerence and European emollience.  The backdrop to the crisis is President Donald Trump’s withdrawal last year from the multinational nuclear agreement that his predecessor, Barack Obama, had reached with Iran in 2015. This agreement had limited Iran’s nuclear programme in exchange for a partial lifting of sanctions. American sanctions on Iran were tightened sharply in April under Mr Trump’s policy of “maximum pressure”. Moreover, any foreign firms that do business with Iran also face the threat of punishment. That prompted Iran to walk away from elements of the pact and to hit back in other ways. In May America and several of its allies blamed Iran for mine attacks on ships in the Gulf of Oman. Matters almost came to a head when Iran shot down an American spy drone on June 20th, causing Mr Trump to order—and then cancel—air strikes on Iran. That was the febrile atmosphere on July 4th, when British marines abseiled onto the deck of the Adrian Darya 1 in Gibraltarian waters. They did so on the basis of American intelligence suggesting that the tanker’s oil was bound for Syria, whose main refinery is under EU sanctions. On July 19th, after weeks of naval shadow-boxing, Iran procured a bargaining chip of its own by grabbing a British tanker, the Stena Impero, in the Strait of Hormuz on spurious charges of safety violations. That may have strengthened Iran’s hand. But it was not until Iran promised that the tanker would not be sent to Syria, or any other destination covered by EU sanctions—promises extracted after weeks of intense diplomacy involving British and Iranian diplomats—that Gibraltar relented. “In light of the assurances we have received,” said the territory’s chief minister on August 15th, “there are no longer any reasonable grounds for the continued legal detention of the Grace 1 in order to ensure compliance with the EU Sanctions Regulation.” The ship was accordingly freed. That was a relief to Britain. The threat of further ship-grabs, which had led the Royal Navy to send extra warships to the Gulf, would diminish, and Iran would probably release Britain’s tanker in turn. But the drama was not over yet. The Adrian Darya’s new paint barely dry, when America made a last-ditch effort to keep the heat on Iran. The next day, on August 16th, a federal court in Washington, DC, issued a warrant for its re-seizure, on the basis that the ship was secretly controlled by a network of companies run by Iran’s Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC), a powerful branch of Iran’s armed forces. America’s legal case reflected both the long reach of its sanctions and their unique severity against Iran. In April the Trump administration had designated the IRGC as a foreign terrorist organisation, against the advice of American military and intelligence officials. The ship’s “deceptive voyages” were part of large-scale money-laundering operation, complained America’s Department of Justice. That cut no ice with Gibraltar. It pointed out that the EU’s sanctions laws differ from America’s, and that Europeans—like the rest of the world—treat the IRGC as unsavoury actors rather than outright terrorists. The Adrian Darya 1 may yet struggle to sell its wares; America has threatened to impose sanctions on anyone doing business with her. But she has probably escaped America’s clutches. Even the Trump administration is likely to rule out nabbing the ship in international waters, which would cause an outcry. And courts in Greece—where she is due to arrive on August 25th—will prove no more pliant than those in Gibraltar. Nevertheless, the diplomatic tussle has put Britain in a difficult position. In May Hassan Rouhani, Iran’s president, warned that unless the deal’s other signatories—including Europe, China and Russia—helped Iran withstand the tightening vice of American sanctions, it would begin steadily violating elements of the deal, inching closer to the ability to build nuclear weapons. It has started to act on that threat. Iran is also said to have warned, privately, that unless it can export 1.5m barrels of oil per day, far more than it does now, it will walk away (oil makes up about a third of Iran’s government budget). Like its European allies, Britain wants to encourage Iran to remain in compliance. It has made sincere efforts to that end. In January it spearheaded, with France and Germany, the creation of Instex, a barter mechanism that would facilitate certain types of Europe-Iran transactions, particularly for humanitarian supplies. British diplomats say they remain eager to soothe Iran with continued trade. But the seizure of the Adrian Darya 1—with its 2.1m barrels of oil—threw a spanner in the works, not least because Britain was prodded into action by American intelligence. Further complicating matters, Britain’s government changed hands midway through the crisis; on July 24th, Boris Johnson succeeded Theresa May as prime minister, and appointed new foreign and defence ministers. Mr Johnson has adopted a confrontational attitude to European partners over the terms of Britain’s departure from the European Union, saying Britain would leave the EU as scheduled on October 31st, with or without a deal. He has also courted the Trump administration, which is keen to encourage Brexit and is holding out the prospect of a speedy free-trade deal between Britain and America to help cushion the British economy. That leaves Britain’s Iran policy in a parlous position. Should Mr Johnson continue to side with the Europeans, he may anger America, placing at risk the promise of a post-Brexit economic deal. But if he sides with Mr Trump and heaps more pressure on Iran, he would risk a complete collapse in the teetering nuclear deal and a spat with Europe. “You can't maintain that post-Brexit you'll be a loyal ally of European nations in matters of security and ditch 20 years of Iran policy by moving over to the American side,” says Richard Dalton, who served as Britain's ambassador to Iran between 2003 and 2006. “If Britain is to have any influence in the world, it's got to keep intact the relationships with France and Germany in order to continue to be a bridge between America and Europe.” Thus far, Mr Johnson has continued to seek a balance. Whereas Mrs May’s government had tried to corral a group of European states in a maritime-security mission for the Persian Gulf—in marked preference to one involving America—Mr Johnson’s government quickly signed up to the American-led scheme. John Bolton, Mr Trump’s national security adviser, visiting Britain on August 12th, noted with pleasure that the choice “reflects a change from the prior government”. But the release of the Adrian Darya 1 shows that even Mr Johnson is unwilling to break with European partners and join Mr Trump in trying to throttle Iran. At least not yet.