MANY FANS of Bruce Springsteen, an American rock star, would struggle to identify the exact moment at which their passion began. Not Sarfraz Manzoor. In 1987, during his first week at a new school in Luton, a humdrum town just north of London, he made a friend called Amolak—who, like him, was the son of immigrants, albeit from India rather than Pakistan. Amolak gave him a handful of cassette tapes, explaining that they contained “a direct connection to everything that is meaningful and significant in life”. Lying in bed that night, Mr Manzoor started to listen to a live version of “The River”, a song about growing up in a deadbeat town. The recording begins with Mr Springsteen narrating a story: “when I was growing up, me and my dad used to go at it all the time, over almost anything.” The 16-year-old was stunned. Pop music, as he knew it, was plastic nonsense about dancing on the ceiling and total eclipses of the heart. He had never heard anything that reflected his own life: the suffocating sense that he was going nowhere, the resentment of his traditionalist father. Hearing those emotions set to a harmonica and guitar was almost a religious experience. “Having stumbled in the dark for so long,” he wrote years later, “on that September night I was blinded by the light.”  Hence the title of a new film based on Mr Manzoor’s adolescence. “Blinded by the Light”, which is also the name of Mr Springsteen’s debut single, draws heavily on a memoir that Mr Manzoor, who became a journalist, published in 2007. A teenaged version of the author, who has been renamed Javed, is played by Viveik Kalra. Amolak, now called Roops, is portrayed by Aaron Phagura (both are relatively unknown British actors). In the director’s chair is Gurinder Chadha, who has worked on several comedies featuring British-Asian families. Her most famous, “Bend It Like Beckham” (2002), was about a Sikh girl from London who wants to become a footballer. Like that movie, “Blinded by the Light” derives many of its laughs from the divide between conservative parents and defiant children. Malik (Kulvinder Ghir), Javed’s father, is horrified when the solitary cricket bat that hangs on his son’s bedroom wall is replaced by posters of a rock star wearing the Stars and Stripes. He is convinced that Mr Springsteen is Jewish, thanks to his surname, a recurring gag that causes Javed much embarrassment. Malik tells his son that he has already given him plenty of freedom in life, since he can choose to become a doctor or a lawyer or an estate agent. When the 16-year-old gazes longingly across the road to where his white friend Matt is hosting a rave, Malik shouts: “Pakistanis don’t go to parties!” But the extent of the racism depicted in the film makes it much bleaker than “Bend It Like Beckham”. In his memoir, Mr Manzoor describes the skinheads who menaced him on his way home and a pig’s head that appeared at the local mosque. Those incidents appear in his screenplay, along with bigoted graffiti on the garage door, young boys urinating through the letter box and National Front thugs disrupting a family wedding. (The chants of “send them back”, written into the film long before they featured at a rally for Donald Trump, sound uncomfortably familiar.) Mr Manzoor’s script also renders his family’s hardships as poignantly as his book does. As Malik, Mr Ghir captures his father’s choked-up shame after being laid off by the Vauxhall car factory. He continues to help friends with financial matters while demanding ever-greater efforts from his wife and children. Memorable details from the original story survive, such as the suit that Mr Manzoor’s unemployed father puts on each morning, the bundles of sewing that his working mother piles high each evening and the swimming goggles he wore when chopping onions. Mr Springsteen’s lyrics come roaring into this disappointing life. Javed’s moment of epiphany occurs during the great storm of October 1987. The first song he hears on Roops’s cassette is not “The River”, but “Dancing in the Dark”. “I wanna change my clothes, my hair, my face / Man I ain’t going nowhere, I’m just living in a dump like this,” Mr Springsteen howls, as thunder booms above the council houses of Luton. For every frustration in Javed’s life, there is a verse that distills it. When some white teenagers try to bully him and Roops into giving up their seats in a restaurant, the pair face them down by with lines from “Badlands”: “For the ones who had a notion, a notion deep inside, That it ain’t no sin to be glad you’re alive, I wanna find one face that ain’t looking through me, I wanna find one place, I wanna spit in the face of these badlands.” At times Javed’s insistence on reciting lyrics to other people becomes irritating (his girlfriend, a white anti-Thatcher campaigner who did not feature in the book, tells him off for being a prat). The grins and cheers that spontaneously break out in the restaurant feel contrived, as they do whenever Javed uses the words of “the Boss” against his tormentors. And enjoyable as it is to hear “Born to Run” in surround sound, the five-minute dance sequence involving most of Luton could have been shortened a bit. But although this telling of Mr Manzoor’s life occasionally veers towards an American high-school movie, it does so only to demonstrate the universal appeal of Mr Springsteen’s songs about longing and resilience. Even Malik understands that, eventually. After listening to one of Javed’s tapes, he explains to his son that the songs are about working hard, not giving up and respecting your parents. “This man,” he exclaims, “must be Pakistani!” “Blinded by the Light” is screening in Britain now and in America from August 16th