CALI IS FAMOUS for its salsa. Although the style of Latin music originated in Cuba and was super-charged in New York, this city in south-west Colombia has marketed itself as the salsa capital of the world. But however professionally the Caleños do salsa’s glitz, glitter and showy dance steps, it is not really the local style. That is Pacific music—all wooden marimbas and leather drums—in which the songs are soulful and communal. They are often about religion and daily life. It is that genre which is celebrated every year at the Festival de Música del Pacífico Petronio Álvarez. The festival’s setting is spectacular. The large open-air stage is set against mountains that rise to 1,500 metres and shield the city from the ocean; as the sky darkens, lights shimmer on the slopes and the statue of Cristo Rey, Cali’s version of Rio’s Christ the Redeemer, is illuminated from below. The first days of the event are given over to a competition in four categories: bands with the traditional Cauca violin; bands featuring the marimba, which originates from west Africa but is now the definitive sound of the region, also known as el piano de la selva (the piano of the jungle); Chirimía bands, which feature clarinets, and Agrupación Libre, free groups doing their own thing. (Somewhat surreally, when a band finishes their performance they assume a pose while the hi-tech stage rotates and the next band, similarly frozen, moves in before beginning their set.)  Cali, with a population close to 2.5m, is almost 50% Afro-Colombian. For years traditional music from the Pacific coast was only known locally or by world-music specialists, but it is now attracting large and enthusiastic crowds: when the festival was founded 23 years ago it drew 1,200 visitors in total—now at least 100,000 spectators turn up on each of the six days, with more at the weekend. Furthermore, while the audience at Petronio Álvarez was once primarily made up of Afro-Colombians, it now includes a wider demographic mix. That is reflected in the lineup. Herencia de Timbiqui, a popular marimba band who have moulded the style into pop ballads, played the final concert, with La Filarmónica de Cali providing orchestral arrangements of their songs. The bubbling marimba—it sounds rather like a xylophone—offered a pleasing contrast to the thrusting horn lines and soaring strings. The performance represented an essentially African tradition being embraced by the most European of forms, the symphony orchestra, and demonstrated that the strength of Pacific music has always been its mix of African, indigenous and European elements. Favourable political conditions have allowed Petronio Álvarez to truly flourish. Since the peace deal signed in 2016 between the state and FARC, a guerrilla army, the Pacific region has become much safer (an estimated 220,000 people were killed, and 7m displaced, during the 52-year conflict). People in the area overwhelmingly voted in favour of the peace treaty in the accompanying referendum; several of Colombia’s internationally known musicians, including Shakira, Juanes and Carlos Vives, as well as local Pacfic bands, were vociferous in their support. Foreign tourism to Colombia has more than doubled since 2013—the government had started to negotiate with the FARC in 2012—and now stands at 4.5m a year. Cali opened a tourism office in January 2017 and now receives close to 200,000 foreign visitors, with many making the trip for Petronio Álvarez. When William Angulo, the lead singer of Herencia de Timbiqui, took to the stage he declared that he was proud to be performing “because the people of the Pacific celebrate in peace and we support that!” The audience roared in appreciation and enthusiastically twirled scarves—an essential feature of traditional dances—in their right hands. The crowd looked like an enormous flock of fluttering white doves.