IN 1943, when the Gestapo turned up at Hans Otto Jung’s home in Frankfurt, he quickly nudged the dial on his radio. Listening to Allied broadcasts was an illegal act: those found guilty of tuning in to an international station could be imprisoned or even executed for treason. As a member of the Frankfurt Hot Club, a group of young jazz enthusiasts, Jung often found transmissions from London, Switzerland and America, for they played the music deemed “degenerate” and outlawed in Germany. When the secret police inspected his radio, they were confused. “They said: ‘the needle is pointing between Prague and Lisbon. Which of these radio stations have you been listening to?’” Jung recalled in an interview in 2002. “To which I said, ‘I couldn’t possibly comment. But, as you’re asking, well...Prague!’ Because Lisbon would have been forbidden.” A recording of that interview features in “Rebel Sounds”, an exhibition at the Imperial War Museum in London. It is part of “Culture Under Attack”, a programme of shows, performances and lectures demonstrating “how war threatens not just people’s lives, but also the things that help define us” (“Art in Exile” explores how the artefacts and artworks held in Britain’s institutions were protected during the second world war, while “What Remains” reveals the architectural cost of conflict). “Rebel Sounds” focuses on the politicisation of music in Germany in the 1930s, in Northern Ireland in the 1970s, in Serbia in the 1990s and present-day Mali. It tells the stories of ordinary people and, through music, interviews, photographs and memorabilia, shows the extraordinary lengths they went to to preserve the culture they loved.  In war, culture is often caught in the cross-fire; oppressive regimes have also clamped down on freedom of expression and sought to bend the arts to their will. Yet members of the Frankfurt Hot Club played secret gigs with the help of a lookout. Aliou Touré, Garba Touré and Oumar Touré fled the civil conflict in northern Mali, where Islamist groups imposed sharia law, and formed Songhoy Blues, a desert-blues band, in 2012. Militants had banned the playing and enjoyment of music—with harsh penalties for those who disobeyed—but Songhoy Blues saw “music as our weapon, our songs as our resistance”. That was true, too, for the hosts of Radio B92, a radio station based in Belgrade. From May 1989 onwards, they were open in their criticism of Slobodan Milosevic’s presidency and policies. They reported live on the clashes between government forces and demonstrators in 1991, which they could see from their window. Thereafter, when officials limited the station’s broadcasts to music, hosts sent coded messages to listeners with songs such as “Fight The Power” and “White Riot”. “We were always showing we were looking for some kind of alternative way to bypass the oppression and create a positive effect,” Gordon Paunovic, B92’s music editor, said. For Teri Hooley, music was not so much about resistance as simply an essential and meaningful part of everyday life. Violence in Belfast during the Troubles had created a cultural wasteland, with bands dissuaded from playing there. The music scene suffered, and people were angry: when The Clash, an English punk band, cancelled a gig in 1977, would-be concert-goers rioted. To address this Mr Hooley founded Good Vibrations, a record shop, in 1976—it was located on Great Victoria Street, one of the most heavily bombed areas in the city, yet it did not stop music fans from dropping by. “We had all sorts of people in the shop,” Mr Hooley said, “we had IRA men, we had loyalists, all sorts of nutters.” He went on to organise concerts in contested areas and take bands on tour despite intimidations from parliamentary leaders. “Rebel Sounds” captures not just the immediacy and the emotiveness of music but also the emptiness of a life without it. For the figures featured here, music symbolised freedom—and it is hard not to be stirred by the same passion. In the final room, visitors are faced with a question on a touch screen: “Is it worth risking prison in order to protect music?” Almost two-thirds of voters said yes. “Rebel Sounds” continues at the Imperial War Museum, London, until January 5th