GIUSEPPE CONTE is poised to boldly go where no Italian technocrat has gone before. Independent prime ministers in Italy either bow out at the end of their governments or get shoved aside by the voters if they try to hang in. But on August 29th president Sergio Mattarella was expected to ask Mr Conte to form a second coalition, this time teaming the anti-establishment Five Star Movement (M5S) with the centre-left Democratic Party (PD). Mr Conte has already spent the past 14 months heading an all-populist government that yoked the Five Stars to the hard-right Northern League. The League’s leader, Matteo Salvini, ill-advisedly pulled the rug this month, thinking it was under his allies’ feet, when in fact it was under his own. The M5S has around a third of the seats in parliament, and can command a majority with the help of the PD and a few independent lawmakers.  In his resignation speech on August 20th, the popular Mr Conte excoriated the League leader to his face, calling him disloyal and irresponsible. The former university law teacher’s spirited performance endeared him to the Five Stars, to the point that they made his continuance in office a condition of reaching a deal with the PD. A second Conte government will please officials in Brussels. They had feared that Mr Salvini’s plans for drastic tax cuts, in a country already saddled with an immense national debt (equivalent to 134% of GDP), could panic the markets and jeopardise the euro. It will also delight Donald Trump, who tweeted his support for his “highly respected” buddy, “Giuseppi” (sic). But there are snags. The M5S intends to seek the approval of its members for the new course it has set. If they vote against the alliance in an online ballot, it will probably force a general election. Italy can ill afford that. It would take until November to hold the vote, and parliament has to approve a budget for 2020 by year’s end. That will be particularly tricky this year: €23bn ($25bn) in spending cuts or tax increases are needed to meet the terms of the EU’s deficit limits. Otherwise, value-added-tax rates will have to be raised sharply. Moreover, despite more than a week of tortuous negotiation, the Five Stars and PD seemed to have agreed on little more than the name of the prime minister. The M5S’s founder, Beppe Grillo, suggested the cabinet might include other technocrats. Perhaps most important, the two parties have sharply different cultures. Though most Five Star activists lean leftwards, they disdain the liberal elite and see the PD as its embodiment. That was not a problem with the League, even though it backed some policies they found distasteful. The fate of Italy’s new government may show which is the stronger bond—ideological affinity or a populist temperament.