A SURVIVOR of child sexual abuse in New York state previously had until the age of 23 to file charges or a civil claim against his or her abuser. It takes time to reckon with such malevolence, and to feel comfortable talking about the abuse, never mind speaking to police or a lawyer. A third of child sex-abuse victims never disclose that they have been abused. If they do, the average age of victims when they tell their stories is 52, usually too late to file criminal charges or to file a civil claim. On August 14th, six months after Andrew Cuomo, New York’s governor, signed the Child Victims Act into law, the bill went into effect. The law changes the statute of limitations for prosecuting and filing civil suits against abusers—and the institutions who shield them. Survivors now have until the age of 28 to press criminal charges and have until the age of 55 to file a civil suit. The new law also includes a one-year window when people can file lawsuits and seek damages for the pain they suffered, no matter how long ago the abuse occurred.  In the wake of the Catholic church’s ongoing child sex-abuse scandal, as well as other high-profile abuse cases, many states have revised their statutes of limitation for abuse and assault. California changed its law in 2002. About 1150 lawsuits were filed while its window was open. “This year is a banner year”, says Marci Hamilton, head of ChildUSA, a University of Pennsylvania think-tank for child protection. Seven states and Washington, DC have adjusted or will soon adjust their statutes of limitations for child-abuse cases. Vermont has done away with its statute of limitations for child-abuse cases altogether. Thousands of New Yorkers are expected to sue their alleged abusers and the institutions that failed to protect them. James Marsh runs a small law firm that specialises in sexual-abuse cases. He has over 500 clients, most of them middle-aged or older. Other lawyers have even more. Mr Marsh filed at least 17 suits the first day the window opened. In anticipation of the onslaught of cases, New York’s courts have been staffing up. The suits will be handled by 45 designated, specially-trained judges. The one-year temporary filing period, which allows victims to bring cases once beyond the state’s statutes of limitations, may also allow for lawsuits against Jeffrey Epstein, the financier accused of abusing girls at his New York home, among other places. Despite his death, civil lawsuits could still proceed against the estate. Advocates pushed for the New York law for some 16 years. But their efforts failed to persuade the Republican-controlled state senate, which was swayed by the Catholic church and the insurance industry, both opponents of the change. It was only when Democrats took control of both chambers earlier this year that the bill became law. During the debate in the state legislature in January, four lawmakers shared their own stories of childhood sexual abuse, highlighting how pervasive and systemic the problem is, and how many people continue to suffer in silence. The number of victims looks staggering. One pediatric endocrinologist at Rockefeller University Hospital spent decades allegedly abusing hundreds. In April the archdiocese of New York released the names of 120 clergymen who had been credibly accused of sexually abusing a minor or who was in possession of child pornography. Shame and stigma prevent many victims from reporting the abuse. People from low-income households and minority communities are even less likely to report. Few Latinos filed suit in California during its year-long window, observed Jeff Dion, head of the Zero Abuse Project, an advocacy group. He does not want that to be the case in New York. Mr Dion is holding forums and workshops about the new law. Some survivors are also speaking publicly to encourage others to come forward. Joelle Casteix, who successfully filed a civil suit in California during its look-back window, is one of them. Ms Casteix was abused for two years by the choir director at her Catholic high school in Orange County in the late 1980s. Thanks to documents made public during the lawsuit, she learned that school and church leaders had known about the alleged abuse. The Catholic church in New York, along with private schools, the Boy Scouts, hospitals, foster-care systems and other religious organisations, such as Orthodox Jewish groups and Jehovah’s Witnesses, are bracing for a flood of suits. Nicholas DiMarzio, bishop of the Brooklyn diocese, recently warned his congregants: “we do not know how many lawsuits we will face during this window period, and if we will have to declare bankruptcy as a result.” Some of the hardest-fought lawsuits were not between the abusers and the abused, but between insurance companies and the institutions they refused to cover. The archdiocese of New York and Rockefeller University have sued their insurers after the companies refused to cover claims and legal fees related to the new law. This was expected: when other states changed their laws, insurance companies similarly baulked. Ultimately, they paid out, sometimes under duress from courts. Some survivors will opt to avoid litigation, applying instead for a settlement via an existing programme. Kenneth Feinberg, the special master of the September 11th Victim Compensation Fund, is reaching settlements for the archdiocese of New York. But there are those, including Mr Dion, who remain sceptical of the church’s programme. “It’s an effort to settle cases on the cheap before the act is implemented,” he says. Joseph Zwilling, the archdiocese’s spokesperson, points out that the voluntary programme was established three years before the act went into effect. “It was simply an offer that was made in an attempt by the archdiocese to show sorrow and make reparation for what these individuals endured”. As of July 29th, the archdiocese says it had settled 335 claims to the tune of just over $66m in total. Those who agree to settle cannot file suit. As such, most victims appear to want their day in court.