D.H. LAWRENCE was fascinated by the Etruscans. The English writer referred to the “lost” ways of the ancient Italian civilisation in his letters; in poems he imagined the people as “long-nosed, sensitive-footed, subtly-smiling”, yet “evasive and different”. In 1926 he had the idea to write a study of “Etruscan things”, travelling through Vulci, Cerveteri and Tarquinia. At the Monterozzi of Tarquinia he saw 6,000 tombs cut into the rock, 200 of which are painted, the oldest dating back to the seventh century BC. “It is as if the current of some strong different life swept through them, different from our shallow current today,” Lawrence wrote, “as if they drew their vitality from different depths that we are denied.” Today, Etruscan necropolises are UNESCO World Heritage sites and in the summer months, when tourists flock to Tuscany and the surrounding regions, many visitors will be awed by the vibrant frescoes as Lawrence once was. The only pre-Roman urban civilisation on the Italian peninsula, Etruscan city-states in Tuscany, western Umbria and Lazio flourished as centres of culture and commerce from approximately the tenth to the first century BC, when they were defeated and assimilated into the Roman Republic.  It is Roman writers, such as Livy and Pliny the Elder, who produced the official histories of the Etruscan era. They observed that the Etruscans were well-organised politically, skilled in engineering and almost proto-feminist (their mixed-gender banquets shocked their contemporaries, the ancient Greeks). But as few Etruscan texts have survived, and their language is only partly decoded, much about the ancient way of life remains mysterious. It is the vast cities of the dead, with tombs packed with treasures for the afterlife, which are the richest source of clues. Yet for all this opacity—or perhaps because of it—the Etruscans exert a deep and continuing influence on Italian culture, particularly art. In the Arena Chapel in Padua, Giotto’s depictions of Satan bear a resemblance to Charun, an Etruscan demon present in tomb paintings at Tarquinia; Massimo Campigli’s female nudes also evoke the stylised figures of those historic works. In the 20th century Arturo Martini sculpted his own hybrid fire-breathing monster inspired by the Chimera of Arezzo, a famous and intricate piece of Etruscan bronze-casting. In 1976 Michelangelo Pistoletto, a member of the Arte Povera group, produced an installation which reflected a copy of “The Orator of Trasimeno”, an Etruscan statue, in a mirror to create a dialogue of sorts between past and present. The Etruscans occupy a place in the popular imagination, too. The design for the football used at the World Cup of 1990 (held in Italy) took in an ancient motif of lions’ heads. Silvio Berlusconi constructed an enormous mausoleum at his home in Arcore, near Milan, in 1994: the imitation hypogeum, fit for an Etruscan prince, includes carved niches and objects a media tycoon may wish to take into the next life. (The edifice violates local building regulations and has been declared illegal.) The Etruscans have inspired comic books, too. Disney published “Topolino L’Etrusco” (“Mickey Mouse The Etruscan”) in 2011 as part of its World History series. From August 22nd-25th, Tarquinia hosts the “DiVino Etrusco” festival (a pun on “divine Etruscan” and “Etruscan wine”), a celebration of the region, which attracted 15,000 visitors in 2018. Restaurants in Tuscany and Lazio are often marketed as ristorante etrusco, but the word is adopted as a marker of identity, too. Older residents may bear the nickname “l’Etrusco”; people are sometimes said to have inherited “Etruscan” facial features, particularly long noses and high cheekbones. An Etruscan identity appeals because it suggests atavistic lineages and a regional allegiance. Indeed, in the past some Italians have considered Etruscan artefacts to be a birthright of sorts. To the dismay of the state, tombaroli, or tomb robbers, have often beaten archaeologists to sites of importance, with a large number of artefacts ending up on the black market. Post-war economic inequality left sections of Italian society cash-poor and as it was common for farmers and constructors to unearth Etruscan tombs and their treasures, it was not unusual for these artefacts to be used as currency, with doctors and lawyers reputedly being offered pots as payment for professional services. In 2004 a legislative decree was passed obliging a certificate of authenticity and provenance to be provided in the sale of artefacts, a move which seems to have led to a decrease in illegal trafficking. The air of mystery that surrounds the Etruscans, which so captivated Lawrence, endures to this day. Etruscology remains a popular academic discipline in Italy. The National Etruscan Museum of Villa Giulia, Rome, is thriving: in 2018 the museum received 82,300 visitors, a 14.3% increase on the previous year. In a country where ties to family and place are deeply rooted, it is unsurprising that today’s inhabitants of central Italy retain a strong attachment to their ancient ancestors.