WILD CHEERS seem an odd response when your party has just shed almost one-fifth of its support. But that is how the Saxon branch of Germany′s centre-right Christian Democratic Union (CDU), gathered in a sweaty restaurant in Dresden, hailed the result of a state election on September 1st. The fear before the elections, in Saxony as well as Brandenburg, another east German state, was that the hard-right Alternative for Germany (AfD) might come first in one or both. In the end, the centre held. In Saxony, a state it has run for 30 years, the CDU took 32% of the vote, down from 39% in 2014 but five points ahead of the AfD (whose supporters are pictured). In Brandenburg, a stronghold of the Social Democratic Party (SPD), the party squeaked a three-point win over the AfD. Yet this was still a strong night for the AfD. Since the last elections, in 2014, it has almost doubled its support in Brandenburg and tripled it in Saxony (though it has flatlined in the past two years). It has exploited an increasingly fragmented party system, thriving in east Germany even as it has radicalised under the influence of an ultra-right grouping known as the Flügel (“Wing″). It has mobilised previous non-voters and disillusioned conservatives, in part by appealing to a specifically east German sense of grievance: fully two-thirds of voters in Saxony say that east Germans are “second-class citizens”. Electoral maps of Brandenburg and Saxony show their respective eastern halves painted almost entirely in the blue of the AfD.  Shunned by all other parties, the AfD cannot hope to enter government in either state. But its strength obliged mainstream politicians to campaign against it, and its success will force them to assemble unwieldy coalitions to keep it from power. That will strengthen the party′s argument that it represents the only genuine political alternative. Michael Kretschmer, Saxony′s CDU premier, will take the credit for ensuring that the blue wave was kept in check. During a tireless campaign, marked by endless beer-and-bratwurst sessions, he tilted rightwards on topics like energy and migration while holding the line against the AfD′s radicalism. His tactics sometimes tested the patience of his party’s national leadership, not least when he met Vladimir Putin in St Petersburg to urge an end to the sanctions imposed on Russia for its aggression in Ukraine. He will now have to begin negotiations with left-wing parties to form a viable coalition in Saxony, which will antagonise the local party′s conservative base. But for now, his victory looks like vindication. Indeed, that the CDU and SPD look set to retain power in their respective states will marginally relieve the pressure on the federal government in Berlin, in which the two parties cohabit unhappily. But the future of the “grand coalition″ remains uncertain. Struggling in the polls and riven by splits, the SPD is about to begin an internal contest for a new leader, having defenestrated the previous one after a poor European election result in May. Several of the candidates want the party to walk out of government, an act that would probably trigger an early election. The SPD will make its decision in December. In the meantime, the AfD′s success in eastern Germany has fuelled an anxious national conversation about the persistence of the country′s east-west divide. November 9th will mark the 30th anniversary of the fall of the Berlin wall. What ought to be a moment to celebrate German unity looks increasingly like an occasion to highlight its divisions.