Editor’s note: This article has been updated since publication, after Rashida Tlaib rejected Israel's conditions for visiting her relatives in the West Bank DONALD TRUMP has not yet brought peace to the Middle East, as he promised to do. But on August 15th he achieved something almost as difficult: he got J Street and the American Israel Public Affairs Committee (AIPAC), two Israel-related lobby groups, to agree on a matter concerning Israeli security. They usually occupy opposite ends of a spectrum. AIPAC takes a hardline approach, often backing Binyamin Netanyahu’s government and his Likud party, while J Street stays on the doveish side.  But they are both American, so both objected when Israel announced it would deny entry to two elected members of the House of Representatives—Rashida Tlaib and Ilhan Omar, both Democrats and the first Muslim women elected to Congress—because it dislikes their political views. AIPAC argued that “every member of Congress should be able to visit and experience our democratic ally Israel firsthand.” (J Street was even more forceful, calling the ban “dangerous, unacceptable and wrong…[and] an affront to Congress and the American people.”) That left AIPAC in the odd position of mounting a more vigorous defence of free speech and democratic principles in general, and two far-left Muslim-American women specifically, than America’s president and its ambassador to Israel. Ms Omar and Ms Tlaib were due to arrive in Israel on August 18th for a four-day visit partly sponsored by Miftah, a Palestinian organisation headed by Hanan Ashrawi, a longtime lawmaker, peace negotiator and member of the Palestine Liberation Organisation’s executive committee. They planned to visit Ramallah, Bethlehem and Hebron, as well as East Jerusalem and the hallowed site known to Israeli Jews as the Temple Mount and to Muslims as the Haram al-Sharif, home to the al-Aqsa mosque. Ms Tlaib planned to stay an extra two days to visit her grandmother, who lives in a village in the West Bank. The trip’s itinerary was in harmony with the women’s political views: both support boycotting, divesting from and sanctioning (BDS) Israel to protest against and change the country’s treatment of Palestinians. The Israeli government regards BDS as an attempt not just to end the occupation of territory it captured in 1967, but to delegitimise the Jewish state in its entirety. In 2017 Israel passed a law denying entry to foreign supporters of the BDS movement. But in July, Ron Dermer, Israel’s ambassador to America, said that “out of respect for the US Congress and the great alliance between Israel and America, we would not deny entry to any member of Congress into Israel.” That made sense: allies, particularly democracies that claim to believe in free speech, should not bar entry to elected officials. One might also point out that Israel has survived wars, terrorist campaigns and seven decades of concerted efforts to erase it from the map; it could probably handle a brief visit from two American congresswomen. But then Mr Trump got involved. On August 15th he tweeted, “It would show great weakness if Israel allowed Rep. Omar and Rep. Tlaib to visit. They hate Israel and all Jewish people”. The second statement is incendiary and untrue. Ms Tlaib’s political mentor was Jewish, and Jews in Ms Omar’s home town of Minneapolis rallied to her defence. Both women have made comments decried as anti-Semitic. Ms Omar has apologised for hers; Mr Trump has never apologised for his own statements and advertisements tinged with anti-Semitism. Soon after Mr Trump’s tweet, Mr Netanyahu announced his support of the interior minister’s decision to deny them entry. “The sole purpose of their visit,” he tweeted, “is to harm Israel and increase incitement against it.” He threw Ms Tlaib a small bone: if she were to ask for a humanitarian visit to her relatives, and pledge “not to act to promote boycotts against Israel during her visit,” Israel would “consider her request.” Ms Tlaib has rejected these terms as “oppressive conditions”. “Unprecedented” is a good word to use here: for Israel denying entry to elected officials from its staunchest ally and benefactor; for America’s president siding with a foreign government against Americans, and using the power of the presidency to denigrate and weaken members of an equal branch of government; and for David Friedman, America’s ambassador to Israel, vitiating the foremost of America’s cherished principles in declaring that BDS “is not free speech”. AIPAC and J Street, and many others besides, disagreed with the congresswomen’s views on Israel and BDS—and with Israel’s decision to bar them. Alas, “surprising” would be inapt. Mr Trump has often singled out Ms Omar and Ms Tlaib—along with two other first-term non-white congresswomen, Ayanna Pressley and Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez—for unbecoming abuse and derision. He seems to have calculated that inflaming racial hatred is good for his re-election prospects. He also seems to believe that by calling Democrats anti-Semites and haters of Israel, he can win American Jews’ votes. That is a long shot. No Republican presidential candidate has won a majority of Jewish votes. Republicans tried mightily to convince American Jews that Barack Obama harboured secret anti-Jewish animus; neither of their candidates who ran against him got more than 30% of the Jewish vote. Charles Evans Hughes set the high-water mark for this party by winning 45% in 1912; in 2016, fewer than one in four American Jews voted for Mr Trump. His racial incitement and anti-immigrant animus sit badly with Jews. Most are the descendents of recent immigrants, and sympathise with newcomers. Perhaps the harder question is why Mr Netanyahu should place himself, and his country, so far at one end of America’s partisan divide. To a degree, one can sympathise with his dilemma. Admitting the congresswomen risked annoying America’s thin-skinned president. But barring them risks long-term damage to Israel’s broader relationship with America. For decades, American support of Israel has been broad and bipartisan. Conspiracists—including Ms Omar—see that as evidence of undue Jewish influence: as she tweeted, “It’s all about the Benjamins, baby” (referring to $100 bills, which depict Ben Franklin). In fact the relationship is partly strategic. During the cold war Israel was a Western-facing ally, and it remains America’s staunchest supporter in a region largely sceptical of American power and influence. But more than that, it was based on shared values: democracy and precisely the sort of democratic ideals—free speech and robust political debate—for which Messrs Trump and Netanyahu have shown such contempt. American-Jewish liberals may have agonised over Israel’s treatment of the Palestinians, but many saw a beleaguered country doing its best to placate an enemy bent on its destruction. That bipartisan consensus has begun to fray. Mr Netanyahu and Mr Obama had a frosty relationship. In 2015 Mr Netanyahu accepted congressional Republicans’ invitation to address a joint session of Congress, where he inveighed against the nuclear deal that Mr Obama brokered with Iran. A poll released last year showed a broad split between the two parties’ views of Israel: 79% of Republicans sympathise more with Israel than the Palestinians, compared with just 27% of Democrats. For Mr Netanyahu, what matters right now is neither maintaining good relations with liberal-minded American Jews nor upholding democratic standards. His priority is to win Israel’s “re-run” election next month—and to do that he seeks to motivate his nationalist base. Israeli right-wingers love Mr Trump and see in him the most pro-Israel of all American presidents; they are thrilled to see Mr Netanyahu working in concert with him. Like Mr Trump, they would regard letting in the two congresswomen as a sign of weakness. Both men have chosen short-term gain with long-term risks.