IF FOOTBALL fans needed a reminder of how strong the Premier League’s top two teams are, they got a timely one on August 10th, the first day of the new season. Liverpool, who finished second in the division last time and won the Champions League, Europe’s top knockout competition, thumped Norwich 4-1 in the opening match of this campaign. The Reds accumulated a massive 97 points in the Premier League last season, and were pipped only by Manchester City on 98. Those were two of the three highest tallies ever recorded in English top-flight football (after the 100 points that City recorded in 2017-18). The gap between this “top two” and the rest of the Premier League’s “big six”—an elite group of clubs that has dominated the competition for most of the last decade—was vast. Chelsea finished a distant third last season, with 72 points; Tottenham and Arsenal barely cracked 70. Manchester United, who finished sixth with a measly 66, ended up an equal number of points between Manchester City, their loathed rivals, and Cardiff City, who were relegated.  The task for this chasing pack of four during the summer break has been to improve their squads, in the hope of narrowing the divide. Catching up with two of the greatest sides in football history might seem like an insurmountable task. But at the end of the last campaign, Game Theory argued that a key reason for the successes of Manchester City and Liverpool was their cunning use of the transfer market—with a set of strategies that could easily be emulated. These top two clubs are hardly paupers. Abu Dhabi’s royal family owns Manchester City, and spends approximately £390m ($470m) a year on transfer fees and wages, according to 21st Club, a football consultancy. Only Barcelona have a higher annual bill. Liverpool’s benefactor is Fenway Sports Group, which also runs the Boston Red Sox, a successful baseball team. The owners splurge £290m a year on players, and in the past 12 months have set world records for the most expensive goalkeeper and defender. However, the two clubs have invested those riches wisely, by seeking players with two characteristics. First, they should be young, so that the club could enjoy most of their peak years between the ages of 24 and 28. Second, they should belong to clubs outside of Europe’s elite, who have less bargaining power to demand a fat transfer fee. Such a strategy might seem risky, because it is hard to know exactly how a young talent will develop, or whether he can step up to the highest level. But it has paid off handsomely for City and Liverpool. Most of their key players now were 26 or younger when they arrived from second-rate teams. Among their number are Kevin de Bruyne, Bernardo Silva, Ederson, Mohamed Salah, Virgil van Dijk and Roberto Firmino. Tottenham employed a similar strategy, which allowed them to punch above their limited financial weight—including an unexpected run to the final of the Champions League last season. But Manchester United, Arsenal and Chelsea have all been profligate, by signing established stars who were approaching the twilight of their careers. 21st Club reckons that between the summer of 2016 and the end of last season, these three bought more than 25% of their players from Europe’s 15 highest-ranked teams, compared to less than 20% for City, Liverpool and Spurs (see chart). Many of them have been expensive flops, such as Alexis Sánchez, Radamel Falcao and Henrikh Mkhitaryan. As the three clubs’ results have declined, the temptation to buy a readymade solution from Real Madrid or Bayern Munich has only increased. Out with the old However, it seems that officials at these wasteful teams have at last learned from their mistakes. The change has been most stark at Manchester United. In recent seasons Messrs Sánchez, Falcao and Mkhitaryan have all sealed lucrative but disappointing moves to Old Trafford (along with various spells at Arsenal and Chelsea). Fans can also point to the acquisitions of Ángel Di María (£67m from Real Madrid) and Nemanja Matic (£40m from Chelsea) as big names who failed to live up to their billing. The supporters lay most of the blame on Ed Woodward, the executive vice-chairman. Mr Woodward, a former banker, has been calling the shots at Old Trafford since Sir Alex Ferguson, the team’s highly decorated manager, retired in 2013. Though the vice-chairman has hired and fired several head coaches since then, United have failed to compete for the title. This penchant for older stars has left the Red Devils short of squad members in their prime. According to Ben Mayhew, a football analyst, players aged 24 to 28 only accumulated 45% of the team’s minutes on the pitch last season, the third-lowest figure in the league. But a new head coach, Ole Gunnar Solskjaer, seems to have inspired a change. As a player Mr Solskjaer was one of a handful of youngsters who thrived under Sir Alex, winning a slew of trophies in the late 1990s and early 2000s. Now he is emulating his mentor’s philosophy. United have purchased three players this summer, all of whom are young and come from smaller clubs. Two are 21-year-olds with plenty of potential: Aaron Wan-Bissaka, who arrived from Crystal Palace for £49m, and Daniel James, a Welsh winger, from Swansea for £15m. The marquee signing, Harry Maguire, has cost an eye-watering £80m, a new record for a defender. But at 26, he has already shown rock-like consistency for Leicester City and the English national team. Arsenal have also rejuvenated themselves. The Gunners were once famous for nurturing callow foreigners but lost patience with that approach five years ago. The club has become increasingly reliant on older heads, such as Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang (30), Mesut Özil (30), Sokratis Papastathopoulos (31) and Nacho Monreal (33). Last season only Burnley gave more minutes to players older than 28, estimates Mr Mayhew. However, under Unai Emery, the new manager (pictured), the club’s scouts have clearly realised that young reinforcements are urgently needed, and that they can be found most cheaply in less fashionable leagues. Nicolas Pépé, a £72m attacker from Lille, is one of four arrivals who fits that description. (Arsenal’s only purchase older than 24 is David Luiz, a 32-year-old defender from Chelsea, who has been snapped up for just £8m.) Chelsea fans have watched enviously as their rivals have poached these prospects from around Europe, thanks to a one-year transfer ban. The Blues have one of the largest youth academies in the world, and loan out scores of youngsters to teams in lower divisions. But FIFA, the sport’s governing body, claims that the London club has been giving professional contracts to foreigners younger than 18, which is banned except in some special circumstances. (Chelsea disputes the accusation.) While the suspension holds, the Blues might have to actually use these youngsters, rather than farming them out for profit. Just 7% of the club’s minutes last season went to players under 24, the third-lowest figure in the league. Tottenham, meanwhile, have extended their record of prudent business. Last season they became the first English club in Premier League history not to make a single transfer, having realised that their existing squad was good enough for a tilt at the Champions League. This time Daniel Levy, Spurs’ astute chairman, has made four acquisitions, all of them younger than 24 and previously at unheralded clubs. Data wonks reckon that two of them, Tanguy Ndombélé and Giovani Lo Celso, are among the most promising midfielders in Europe. Will this summer of shrewd business allow the chasing four to catch the top two? The incumbents have certainly had quieter off-season breaks than their challengers. Liverpool signed no first-team players at all. Manchester City made five defensive acquisitions, all 25 or younger, but only Rodri, a 23-year-old deep-lying midfielder, seems likely to occupy a starting berth. Perhaps this stability, like Tottenham’s last year, will allow these two excellent teams to pick up where they left off. But betting markets offer a glimmer of hope for fans of other sides. Gamblers on Betfair Exchange are pricing in nearly a 15% chance that City finish third or below, and roughly a 40% probability for the Reds. Clearly, such a coup for Manchester United or Arsenal would owe as much to the recruiting department as to the players on the pitch.