COLOMBIA ENDED its 52-year-long war against the FARC guerrilla group in November 2016, when the country’s then-president, Juan Manuel Santos, signed a treaty with the rebels’ leader, Timoleón Jiménez, using a pen made from a bullet. More than 200,000 people died during the conflict, and some 6m were displaced. On August 29th this year Colombians woke up to news that seemed to threaten a return to war. It came in the form of a 32-minute video released by Iván Márquez, once the FARC’s number-two commander, in which he announced that he would take up arms again to “fight for a betrayed peace”. Flanked by other commanders and fighters, in front of a banner with the FARC’s old crossed-rifles logo, Mr Márquez declared that the state’s failure to fulfil commitments and “judicial insecurity obliged us to return to the jungle”. Footage shot from a drone appeared of the vast jungles of eastern Colombia, near the border with Venezuela, where the warrior has established his new base.  Mr Márquez’s real motives for returning to combat are unclear. The United States regards him as the ringleader of the FARC’s drug-trafficking operations during the war and has offered a reward for his capture. Standing with him in Puerto Inirida, where the video was believed to have been shot, was Jesús Santrich, who disappeared on June 30th this year when Colombia’s government sought to extradite him to the United States on charges that he trafficked in cocaine after the peace deal was signed. Mr Márquez was among the lead negotiators of the peace deal for the FARC. But he distanced himself from the agreement after a renegotiation, which took place when Colombian voters rejected the first version in a referendum. While Mr Jiménez and other leaders converted the FARC into a political party and took up seats in congress reserved for them under the peace agreement, Mr Márquez has been largely out of sight since last year when he left a transition zone set aside for former FARC fighters. He does not seem able to resume combat even at the level of the mid-2010s, when the FARC had already been greatly weakened. Some 10,000 former fighters have demobilised and remain committed to the peace deal. It is hard to imagine them going back to war after two years of living in relative comfort outside the jungle. The new FARC party has expressed outrage at Mr Márquez’s return to fighting. Its leaders say they will adhere strictly to the peace deal. Still, Mr Márquez’s reconstituted force can cause trouble. About 2,000 FARC dissidents rejected the peace deal. They have formed loosely organised armed groups that operate mainly in southern Colombia, where they concentrate on trafficking drugs. Some will no doubt rally to Mr Márquez, who is respected by rank-and-file guerrillas. Among his companions in Puerto Inirida were two of the FARC’s most ferocious commanders, known as El Paisa and Romana. “People who have this much experience in war don’t do this to simply scare,” says Sergio Guarin, an analyst. Mr Marquez’s announcement is a shock for Colombia’s government. Iván Duque, the country’s president since August last year, came into office as a sceptic of the peace deal. But as president, he has tried to assuage foes of the deal without wrecking it. Mr Duque has sought to undermine the “transitional-justice” system, under which former FARC leaders are given light punishments if they confess to their crimes. Otherwise, he has implemented the peace agreement more faithfully than many of its supporters had feared. The government has been upgrading rural roads, as promised in the agreement, and continued a programme of offering poor farmers alternatives to growing coca, the raw material for cocaine. It has extended the stipends to former fighters beyond the term set in the peace deal. Mr Márquez has made the president’s job harder. He will face pressure from the peace deal’s foes to be more critical, especially of the transitional-justice provisions. At the same time, to discredit FARC 2 in the eyes of former fighters, Mr Duque will have to speed up its implementation. That will entail, among other things, stepping up protection for demobilised fighters. Around 130 have been murdered by FARC dissidents and other armed groups since the deal was signed. The government will have to fight a new force that promises to join the numerous others that are fomenting violence and crime in parts of the countryside. In one way the fight may be harder than in the past. Mr Márquez’s new FARC may get more active support from Venezuela than the original force did. He has spent most of the past year there. The country’s president, Nicolás Maduro, publicly welcomed him in the country. His predecessor, Hugo Chávez, never offered the FARC explicit support. Colombia’s new war has a dangerous international dimension.