SLEATER-KINNEY have stood the test of time. Formed in 1994 in Olympia, Washington, the band’s members were influenced by riot grrrl, a punk movement that began in the state, rock’n’roll and grunge. They have spent the 25 years since winning plaudits—they are considered by many critics to be one of the most important indie-rock bands of the early 21st century—and experimenting with their sound. Their unapologetically feminist and left-leaning sensibility has remained intact. Sleater-Kinney released their ninth studio album, “The Centre Won’t Hold”, on August 16th. In many ways it is the second album in the second act of their career. From their self-titled debut in 1995 to “The Woods” (2005), the band released seven albums in quick succession. Their spiky sound was founded on a basic punk template of urgent guitar lines and propulsive drumming, but was made distinct by contrasting vocals provided by Carrie Brownstein (pictured) and Corin Tucker. The lyrics were forthright and relatable, analysing relationships, upbraiding male privilege and condemning the worst of rock’s chauvinist clichés. “The Woods” was billed as their final album, and on it they took a sonic leap. Their spritely, fast-paced punk was replaced by a heavier, portentous sound; it was grandiose, uncompromising and a fitting farewell. In 2009, when Pitchfork chose its best 200 albums of the 2000s, it listed both “One Beat” (2002) and “The Woods”.  Yet a decade later the trio resurfaced with “No Cities to Love” (2015). The weight of “The Woods” had been lifted and the band returned to something closer to their previous sound, but they seemed more focused on catchy choruses. The world had changed during the group’s hiatus, and America in the wake of the financial crisis offered plenty of new material, from consumerism (explored on “Price Tag”) to existential dread (“Bury Our Friends”). “Surface Envy”, on which Ms Brownstein and Ms Tucker sang united, became a rock anthem. The 2016 presidential election and its aftermath seem to have invigorated the band once more. They recorded “Here We Come” for a compilation album in aid of Planned Parenthood, a family-planning service, in October 2017. In March Ms Tucker released “November Man”, a protest song about Donald Trump, in collaboration with Bill Buck from R.E.M.. There are no direct references to Mr Trump’s presidency on “The Centre Won’t Hold”, but it captures an uneasy mood. The title track clangs and echoes; Ms Tucker whispers, chants and howls the words as the song builds. The lyrics express disenchantment: “I need a quick injection / To get you out of my way / I need a real affliction / Gives me a reason to stay / I need a new reflection / Don’t wanna see my face.” Elsewhere, “The Future is Here” describes a mundane, everyday loneliness—days that begin and end with inadequate communication conducted via tiny screens. “Broken”, a delicate piano ballad, is dedicated to Christine Blasey Ford and to the thousands of women who have spoken out about sexual abuse in recent years. Ms Tucker, in singing the song, both pays tribute and joins their number: “She, she, she stood up for us / She testified / Me, me too my body cried out / She spoke those lines”. It is an intimate and personal recording. Yet there are also moments of unfamiliar playfulness on the album. “Hurry on Home” sees Ms Brownstein play the submissive to her returning lover: “You know I’m dressdown-able / Uptown-able / Hair grab-able / Grand slam-able”. This bouncy veneer soon gives way to self-doubt—“You know I’m unfuckable / unlovable / unlistenable / unwatchable”—and, eventually, accusation: “You’ve got me used to loving you.” It’s a fun take on the conflicting emotions stirred by desire. On “The Dog / The Body”, the band uses a surging chorus for a tale of escape from a dead-end relationship. “Ruins” is the song in which the influence of a new producer, Annie Clark (better known as St Vincent), is felt most strongly. Dystopian in feel, there are waves of doom-laded synthesiser solos, witchy screams and a chorus inviting listeners to “eat the weak and devour the sane”. After “The Centre Won’t Hold” was recorded, Ms Weiss announced her departure from the band, citing its “new direction”. Indeed, the album is the most musically diverse that the band have produced: there are sounds and styles on “The Centre Won’t Hold” that would never have featured in their previous work. But isn’t a jarring shift across genres, or an amateurish attempt at a new image. It is a mature and interesting record by a band whose willingness to engage with the issues that shape their listeners’ lives makes them as vital as ever.