AFTER THE axis of evil comes the “exclusive club of rogue nations”. That at least is how John Bolton, Donald Trump’s national security advisor, described Venezuela’s place in the world when he spoke on the sidelines of a conference in Lima, the capital of Peru, on August 6th. The meeting, attended by representatives of 59 countries, was called by the Peruvian government to map out a plan for what to do about Venezuela’s dysfunction and the “day after” Nicolás Maduro, its president, falls from power. But it was the United States that stole the limelight. On August 5th Mr Trump signed an executive order to, in effect, quarantine Venezuela in economic terms. The American order freezes Venezuelan government assets. It is the harshest measure to date, aimed at all assets instead of specific companies, such as the state oil firm company, PDVSA, as in the past. But it also applies secondary measures to any country that does business with Venezuela. It is these sanctions which could be the most serious threat to Mr Maduro’s government.  According to Mr Bolton, companies around the world need to decide whether they want to receive a “trickle of income” from Venezuela or trade with the United States. The measure would allow the United States to move against any company, country or individual trading with Venezuela. It is similar to the measures in place against Iran and North Korea. The United States has had similar third-party sanctions in place against Cuba since the early 1960s. The majority of the governments in the region have long opposed them. American authorities have despaired of Chinese and Russian companies operating in Venezuela. They have warned that debt incurred by what they say is an illegitimate Venezuelan government would not be recognised by Mr Maduro’s successors, if and when he falls. In his address to the conference, Mr Bolton said China and Russia should not “double down on a bad bet.” The US government has been careful to state that the measure does not apply to humanitarian aid or telecoms, which would only worsen conditions for ordinary people in Venezuela. The Venezuelan government called the move “economic terrorism” and pledged to resist efforts to remove Mr Maduro from power in favour of Juan Guaidó, the speaker of the National Assembly who is already considered by numerous countries, led by America, to be Venezuela’s legitimate president. The Maduro government and Mr Guaidó’s faction have been talking in Barbados, in negotiations brokered by Norway, not least about organising early elections. Mr Maduro began a second term in power in January. The United States and many Latin American governments oppose holding another election while Mr Maduro remains in power, claiming he could rig them—the charge lodged against him last year. Attendees of the Lima meeting, which included representatives of Mr Guaidó in an initial session, recognise the massive task of reconstruction, starting with the state-owned oil company and productive infrastructure that have crumbled. Venezuela has the world’s largest crude reserves, which made it one of the richest countries in South America. But production has crashed to fewer than a million barrels a day, two-thirds lower than it was at the turn of the century. The United Nations in June estimated that more than 4m Venezuelans had fled the country. This is not lost on Peru, the host of the meeting, which has received more than 850,000 Venezuelans in the past few years. “The region cannot continue to be affected by the weight of this crisis, which has turned a country rich in resources into a disaster,” Peru's foreign minister Néstor Popolizio said at the start of the meeting.