AN OLD Wall Street saying goes “bears sound clever; bulls are rich.” The point is that optimism is often a better strategy than pessimism. It is a useful reminder at a time when the world seems dystopian: China running re-education camps, Russia crushing civil-society groups, Britain ripping up international alliances and the American president resisting facts. David McCourt believes in inexorable progress. He sees the modern world as one where centralised hierarchies—be they governmental or business—must compete against the power of decentralised groups. He presents this view in “Total Rethink” (Wiley, 2019), which traces his career as a tech and media entrepreneur in which he’s shaken up industries and won an Emmy Award in 2005. The Economist called him “a telecoms revolutionary” in a profile in 1998.  As part of The Economist’s Open Future initiative, we questioned Mr McCourt’s optimistic ideas. It is followed by an excerpt from his book, on why the current moment calls for leaders who are entrepreneurial; in fact, revolutionary. * * * The Economist: You argue that power is shifting from institutions to individuals and from centralised organisations to decentralised systems. But when you look at Russia, China, Turkey and elsewhere, traditional power structures look stronger than ever. What makes you optimistic that a “power shift” is taking place? David McCourt: Autocratic, top-down leaders like Putin, Xi and Erdogan may look like a return to stronger, top-down management, but it is a “dead cat bounce,” as the investing expression goes. That is to say, even something without life might still show a glimmer of movement. The bottom-up revolution is still happening, even if some top-down people are in power. Authoritarian governments may put a virtual dam around the flow of information into their countries, but like water, information will find a way around it. There’s always some unknown woman or man working on a laptop who is able to poke holes through that virtual dam. Data-powered globalisation is now an organic force that cannot be stopped—and can lead to sudden eruptions, as in the Arab Spring, or what we are seeing now in Hong Kong and in Russia. The Economist: There was a view in the 1990s that the net was inherently democratising. Now people feel that tech platforms are a cause of many of society’s problems. What is the role of regulation in this environment? Mr McCourt: There’s no denying that we have problems with the tech giants, who have developed faster than regulation has kept up. While they were founded with the right intentions, many of those ideals about democracy and transparency are long gone. We need to give citizens “portability rights” over their data, giving ownership, trust and freedom back to individuals. I’m proud to have played my part in getting the telecoms sector to accept the same idea with phone-number portability years ago. True, regulated, data portability would force the big tech platforms—Facebook and Google especially—to stop treating us like they own us, and to offer even more innovative and user-friendly services. It would spark real competition that would benefit everyone. The Economist: Your book calls for an entrepreneurial mindset in society. But most organisations prefer constancy, not change. Those two things are in tension. So what would you counsel an ambitious, young person to do: beat their head against a wall trying to be a revolutionary in their institution (be it a company, government, charity, etc) or just join a startup? Mr McCourt: The book is about individuals who want to change the way they think: being more open-minded, processing information in a different way, assessing and solving problems in new ways. That’s what entrepreneurial thinking means. I’m looking at radical rather than incremental change; not operating within the status quo. Society is full of educational and healthcare organisations, state institutions and informal networks that push you to think the same way. I agree most organisations want consistency—that’s how they survived in the old world. But it is now a new world. In the old world order, revolutionary thinking got you nothing but arrows in your back. That’s not the case today, because these old institutions are seeing their markets erode, their customers jump ship, and new entrants take their place. Young, ambitious people do not have to bang their heads against the wall any longer: their time has come. The old institutions are desperately looking for solutions, and good organisations are open to new ideas. The Economist: One of your business mentors was Jack Welch, the iconic and controversial former boss of GE. What did he teach you? Mr McCourt: Jack Welch was extremely hard-headed and taught me how to be focused and grow a business. But he believed in forcing incremental change, whereas I’m an apostle of disruption. Disruption is what I did in the telecoms sector. But I took from him the importance of repeating your mission to employees a thousand times, pile-driving the message home. And when it comes to new projects, only use your best people—not whoever is available. He was also big on separating the “strategy stuff” from the nuts-and-bolts of operations. I liked that. The Economist: If power has indeed shifted, what do today’s political and business leaders—steeped in the old paradigm—need to know to succeed in the new environment? Mr McCourt: If you lead now, you have to listen. And you’ve got to talk to people at the level at which people consume information, without succumbing to soundbites. You have to be transparently-free of bullshit. Look at Michelle Obama: if she ran for office in America she would immediately connect because she already has that reputation for being open and honest, hard-working, empowering and respectful. Those are the qualities that are necessary. The power-shift taking place will abolish the power of divisiveness. It requires leaders to be inclusive, collaborative, ready to empower people from the bottom and to embrace and promote diversity. Unfortunately, we don’t seem to see these traits from the current American president, but they are undoubtedly the key ingredients if we are to see progress in society. * * * Leadership in technology and societyFrom “Total Rethink: Why Entrepreneurs Should Act Like Revolutionaries” by David McCourt (Wiley, 2019). Most of us, whether we are business people or political leaders, doctors or teachers, students or parents, live in the present and try to work toward the future one day at a time, taking tiny cautious steps, improving things incrementally. It’s been a survival technique the human race has used throughout our evolution, but it may not be enough to save us from the dangers that lie ahead in the near future, and it may also mean that we, both as individuals and as a society, are going to miss the enormous opportunities that technological progress is making possible. It is time for us to be bold, to be revolutionary, and to change the way we do things. Other forces, some of them constructive, some of them destructive, are now moving too fast for us to keep up with if we continue with the old ways of thinking and acting. There needs to be not one revolution, but many, in both the ways that we think and the ways that we do things if we are going to be successful as individuals and if we are going to improve the lives of the majority of the people on this planet. Positive revolutions could also avert the potential conflicts which are brewing between those of us whose lives are getting better every day and those of us who are being left further and further behind by the increasing speed of progress. It’s easy to illustrate how this widening of the gap can come about. If you watch an elderly steam train making its way out of a station in India, you will see that it is heavily laden with people. They are clinging to the outsides and squatting on the roofs, as well as filling every carriage to capacity. It would seem obvious that there is a need for some improvement in the services being offered to the population. Now, India’s prime minister has commissioned a Japanese company to build the country’s first high-speed railway between Mumbai and Ahmedabad in the west. These trains will have top speeds of 200 miles an hour, far too fast for anyone to hope that they can travel by sitting on the roof, and are indicative of how fast India is developing. It would obviously be a sign of progress to be able to eventually replace all that elderly rolling stock with such sleek high-speed trains. It would be far more comfortable and efficient for those who can afford to buy tickets and sit inside in air-conditioned comfort, but entirely unattainable to the crowds of poor who throng the stations in the hope of hitching a cheap or free ride. All they will be able to do is stand back and watch as the future shoots past them. No one would deny that the creation of a high-speed train that travels at hundreds of miles an hour is a wonderful thing, but at the same time it will increase the gap between those who can afford to travel on it and those who can’t, improving the lives of one and making far worse the lives of the other. In other words, this leap forward, which would be a great thing for the country’s economy and productivity, would inevitably widen the gap between the haves and the have-nots, so the model for traveling across India needs to be rethought and entirely revolutionized in a way that will improve the lives of all those thousands of people clinging to the outsides of the trains, to make their experience closer to that of the people who will be able to afford to buy tickets on the bullet train. I don’t have a solution for that particular problem, but it provides a vivid visual metaphor for the fact that every action inevitably has consequences, so we need to be thoughtful with every step we take, conscious of the effects improvements have on those at the bottom as well as those at the top. Like those Japanese trains, civilization has progressed too far and is traveling too fast to be able to slow down now. If you want to be successful in any field at all, you can’t rely on doing a bit better each year. Companies that increase their revenue by a few percentage points, individuals who marginally increase their earnings, inventors who make superficial improve- ments to their products, will not be the winners of the future. Simply being ambitious for success will not be enough either. We will all have to exercise enormous creativity and imagination in order to see and understand what is happening around us and work out new solutions to the problems that now face us, recognizing both the opportunities and the dangers ahead. We need to dream big, but we also need to dream smart if we don’t want the billions of people left behind on the platforms to rise up and attack the things they know they can never have and the people they know will always prosper at their expense. We need to be bold and creative in everything we do. At a personal level, a cautious, conservative approach to risk and innovation may keep your career or business afloat for just long enough to support you and your family during your lifetime, but it will never change the world and it will never blast your personal achievements into any new stratospheres._____________ Excerpted from “Total Rethink: Why Entrepreneurs Should Act Like Revolutionaries.” Copyright © 2019 by David McCourt. Used with permission of the publisher, John Wiley & Sons. All rights reserved.