ON AUGUST 28th, when Johnny Isakson, Georgia’s senior senator, a Republican, said he would step down at the end of 2019, two years before his term is up, Democratic operatives whooped with joy. It “has never been clearer that the path for Democratic victory runs through Georgia,” proclaimed Nikema Williams, the chair of the Democratic Party of Georgia. “We are the battleground state, and Georgia Democrats are ready to fight and deliver both the Senate and the presidency for Democrats across the country in 2020.” That may be putting it a little strongly. Georgia has not sent a Democrat to the US Senate since 2000; no Democratic presidential candidate has won the state since 1992. But there is little question that Mr Isakson’s retirement represents a potential opportunity for Democrats. The well-respected senator, who said he was stepping down because of “mounting health challenges”, would not otherwise have been up for re-election until 2022, when he would probably have kept his seat.  His departure sets the stage for a special election in November 2020. It also means that both Georgia’s Senate seats will up for grabs next year: David Perdue, the state’s junior Republican senator, is running for a second term. When a state’s two Senate seats go to the vote at the same time they tend to go the same way, meaning the same party is likely to win both. This gives Democrats an additional possible route to taking back the Senate, one they badly need. They would need to flip three seats if they win the presidency next year; four if they don’t (because the vice-president breaks all tie votes in the chamber). Though Republicans are defending 23 seats while Democrats are defending only 12, most of the Republican seats are considered safe. This week, the Cook Report characterised only three as a “toss-up”: Arizona, Colorado and Maine. Roughly twice as many are considered to be potentially competitive. Georgia, with its large non-white population and growing suburbs, is one of them. In 2012 Barack Obama lost the state to Mitt Romney by eight percentage points; 2016 Donald Trump won it by five. Democrats did pretty well in Georgia in last year’s mid-terms. Lucy McBath, a Democratic newcomer who campaigned heavily on gun control, beat Karen Handel in the sixth congressional district, an area on the edge of Atlanta. And Stacey Abrams came within a whisker of beating Brian Kemp in the governor’s race. She lost by 1.4 points and won a majority of young, non-white, and female voters. Ms Abrams, who delivered the Democratic response to President Donald Trump’s State of the Union speech in February, has said she will not run for Mr Isakson’s seat. That is a setback for Democrats in what looks likely to be an uphill battle. It has been suggested that Ms McBath or perhaps Jon Ossoff, who in 2017 lost a special election in the district Ms McBath went on to win, might decide to run. Mr Kemp, the governor, is likely to appoint Mr Isakson’s replacement early next year. Chris Carr, the attorney-general and Sonny Perdue, the agriculture secretary, are considered possible contenders. It is likely, though by no means certain, that whoever Mr Kemp appoints will go on to contest the seat in November. As a special election, that contest will not feature the usual party primaries, but rather a single “jungle primary”. The fact that the two winning candidates, from either or both parties, are likely to proceed to a run-off in January means that the Democrats will want to settle on a single candidate long before then.