EVERY SPORT has its geniuses, who control the ball as if by magic. Lionel Messi does so in football; Steph Curry in basketball; Roger Federer in tennis. Only one person, however, has acquired this superpower midway through an unremarkable career. In December 2013 Steve Smith was close to losing his place in Australia’s Test cricket team. In the previous four years he had scored a paltry average of 33 runs per wicket. In desperation, he adopted an unorthodox approach. Rather than standing side-on, as baseball hitters do, the right-handed Mr Smith pivoted to face the bowler front-on. That made it easier to hook the ball across his body, to his left. To drive the ball to his right, he had to pivot back again and lean into the shot (as pictured above).  The action looked bizarre. But since then Mr Smith has accumulated his runs at a remarkable average of 73 per dismissal. Only one batsman in history has a better record: Sir Donald Bradman, who sustained a legendary average of 99.94 from 1928-48, making him the greatest outlier in any sport. It seems absurd that an eccentric adjustment could propel the struggling Mr Smith into the same stratosphere as Bradman. “The Don”, as adoring Australians called him, seemed superhuman. Wisden, cricket’s leading journal, called him a “flawless engine”. Paul Kelly, a songwriter, described him more poetically: “more than just a batsman, he was something like a tide.” As a boy, your correspondent’s grandfather was lucky enough to see Bradman play in 1947, when his 38 years of age ought to have dulled his powers. Hearing that day retold 70 years later, as the captain carved England’s bowlers apart before a roaring Melbourne crowd, is like listening to the gospel first-hand. But the Don was definitely mortal. Army records revealed his poor eyesight. An experiment at the University of Adelaide found his reactions were slower than the average student. And he was invalided out of the war with chronic back pain. Instead, the best explanation for Bradman’s success was his unusual technique. In his youth he devoted countless hours to hitting a golf ball against a water tank with a wooden stump. Unlike the classically trained English, who lifted the bat directly behind them in the backswing, the boy from the Australian bush looped it away from his body, like a topspin forehand. This allowed him to swivel horizontally—not as much as Mr Smith, but more than his contemporaries. Sports scientists at John Moores University in Liverpool later identified that Bradman’s “rotary” swing made his ball-striking particularly fluent. Mr Smith has clearly found a similar groove. Although he fidgets nervously with his pads when waiting for the ball, he flicks it left and right with wristy, Bradman-esque ease. (Both men happened to be avid tennis players.) All of which begs the question: could any old hacker, with the right coaching, emulate Bradman? Probably not. The Don had ordinary eyes, but he certainly had some innate gifts, since he was an excellent fielder too. David Epstein, a journalist, pointed out in “The Sports Gene” that most elite athletes have extraordinary physical traits—what he calls “hardware”. Nearly 60% of professional baseball players have “superior” depth perception, compared with 18% of the general population. Ted Williams, the best hitter of his generation, had 20/10 vision, near the limit of the human eye. Without at least some decent hardware, Malcolm Gladwell’s famous recipe of 10,000 hours of practice will get you nowhere. Yet within this group of übermenschen it is probably “software”—that is, aptitude learned through training—which makes the difference. In “The Science of Hitting”, Williams explained that everyone else was doing it wrong. The trick was to swing upwards, to increase the chance of a home run, rather than flat, to maximise the probability of getting on base. His advice went unheeded for decades, until baseball’s analytics revolution vindicated him. Since 2015, the average “launch angle” in Major League Baseball has risen by 15%. The proliferation of data in modern sport could make it easier to identify what exactly geniuses like Williams do differently. In basketball, for example, the numbers suggest that Mr Curry’s supremacy on distant three-point shots comes from releasing the ball more quickly than his rivals and propelling it higher, which makes the downward angle to the rim more forgiving. For the most part, however, the technical innovations of sporting greats remain a mystery. Tennis analysts can see that Mr Federer’s whippy forehand and Serena Williams’ punchy backhand are unique, somehow, but struggle to explain why. Nobody has produced a biomechanical model for how Mr Messi’s feet keep the ball so close. And Tiger Woods himself has struggled to recreate the swing that brought him such glory in his 20s. Nature has blessed all of these athletes, of course. But Mr Smith’s example suggests that we should pay more attention to the techniques they have nurtured.