IN ONE ROOM, an exquisite 18th-century carpet depicts a pairidaeza, an ancient Persian garden. The viewer’s eye is drawn down neat furrows and along irrigation systems; gardeners can be seen assiduously tending to crops. Etymologically, pairidaeza is related to paradise and it is not hard to see why, so lush is this vista. But in the next room, a version of Hieronymus Bosch’s “Garden of Earthly Delights” conjures a different mood: chaos reigns as naked bodies throng in ecstasy, some half-animal, one sodomised by a bouquet. Elsewhere, the horticulture is surreally artificial. A beguiling installation by Hicham Berrada (pictured, top), a Moroccan artist, shines a special light onto night-blooming jasmine plants, tricking them into releasing their sweet odour during the day. Yayoi Kusama, a Japanese contemporary artist, covers giant potted plants with polka dots (pictured, below). Such contrasts animate a new exhibition at the Martin Gropius Bau Museum in Berlin. Featuring works by more than 20 diverse international artists, “The Garden of Earthly Delights” shows gardens to be ambivalent domains. They are places of escape from the outside world, far away from the demands of politics and everyday life, elevating the beauty of nature to emulate the divine. Yet this refuge necessarily implies exclusion—after all, the term pairidaeza derives from the words for “walled” and “around”. The question of who or what is excluded, and by whom, persists throughout the show.  For her piece, Lungiswa Gqunta has laid out jagged broken bottles in upturned rows to form a nightmarish parody of a lawn. The danger is real: signs warn visitors to stand well back, and to hold children close. The technique is inspired by wealthy white homeowners in Ms Gqunta’s native South Africa, who attach bottle shards to the tops of their garden walls to keep out intruders. The supposedly civilised garden becomes brutal; the lawn is imperious in its consumption of space and resources. Libby Harward, meanwhile, probes the link between gardens and colonial power. She has placed small, fragile-looking bell jars in the centre of a cavernous white room. Each contains a plant species which was once uprooted from its Australian habitat for a European botanical garden. Hidden speakers play plangent snippets of indigenous Australian languages. Doubly imprisoned in the glass jars and the walls of the gallery, the deracinated plants are presented as survivors of a struggling culture. Taro Shinoda similarly explores a clash of horticultures. He reconstructs Japanese rock gardens in marble, refashioning a traditional Buddhist space in the quintessential material of Western classical sculpture. Rather like a garden show, each artist has the run of their own space. This allows for marked shifts in tone, from strife to soothing quiet. Renato Leotta’s room is laid with cool terracotta tiles, raked by rays of sunlight, over which the visitor is invited to walk barefoot. The tiles had been left uncooked beneath Italian lemon trees during the harvest season, so the falling fruit left an impression in the clay. Small dimples in the surface record Newtonian moments of natural inspiration. Even the most heavenly gardens are haunted by the threat posed by climate change. Maaiki Schoorel’s delicate paintings of floral forms, melting into a hazy background, are a poignant elegy to disappearing species. Heather Phillipson’s video installation, placed in a room with a moist and mulchy floor and walls lit up with a sickly pink glow, introduces the visitor to a talking skunk cabbage. Complete with digitally rendered googly eyes, the carnivorous plant babbles about the necessity of composting humans if an ecological collapse is to be avoided. The overall effect is darkly funny, but as Berlin’s real gardens wither in a historic heatwave, the apocalyptic gallows humour is unsettling. It is no coincidence that artists from diverse backgrounds have been gripped by gardens. With their rich metaphoric ambiguity, gardens have served as ciphers for reflections on nature, the nation and the place of humans therein. Even galleries, ordered spaces set aside for the display and enjoyment of a selection of specimens from the outside world, have a horticultural flavour. This exhibition bears rich intellectual fruits. “Garden of Earthly Delights” continues at the Martin Gropius Bau Museum, Berlin, until December 1st