I FEEL IT in my fingers, I feel it in my toes. From the opening moments of “Four Weddings and a Funeral”, it is obvious that this series—based on the film of the same name by Richard Curtis, released in 1994—is less a blissful renewal of vows, more grounds for divorce. References to the original abound, from the very sweary first scene to the soundtrack (Wet Wet Wet’s “Love is all around”) and even a cameo by Andie MacDowell (Carrie in the original film), but it is all somehow off-key, with some vital element lost in translation. And so the feeling grows. The 1990s are back. “The Lion King” is in cinemas, the Spice Girls are touring, Ann Widdecombe is banging on about Europe. And now Hulu has shot an homage to arguably Mr Curtis’s finest rom-com. Yet where his 117-minute film was light as wedding cake, this series sprawls to ten stodgy episodes: not a night out with the girls, but a hen weekend.  Much like the original, it follows a group of 20-something friends celebrating a seemingly endless succession of nuptials while longing to find someone with whom to say those vows themselves. The twist is that the friends are Americans who came to Britain for a college exchange and stayed. Each has their own special (or not-so-special) relationship with a Brit. In theory, this ought to allow for the sort of comic misunderstandings and pointed observations on class and manners that peppered Mr Curtis’s script. Unfortunately, nobody seems to have bothered to find out what Brits do, or sound like. So the script gives us Gemma (Zoe Boyle), an absurdly plummy woman who thinks cartoons are “films made of drawings”, has a father-in-law who eats “boiled beef” for supper and whose husband supposedly falls asleep in shrubs when he is drunk because “it reminds him of his childhood in Keen-ya”. You begin to wonder whether this is a prequel. Elsewhere, Americanisms creep in. A posh parliamentary staffer talks of “making rent” and “bathing myself in a janitor’s sink”. Another character compares himself to T-Mobile, a network that ceased to exist in Britain four years ago. One of the few authentically English moments comes in episode five, when Basheer (Guz Khan), rushing to hospital after his friend threw a punch in a club, starts to moan about car-parking charges. Despite being written a quarter-century ago, Mr Curtis’s script is in many ways the more modern. This series makes gimmicky references to Instagram influencers and “Love Chalet” (a barely-disguised “Love Island”), but there is no attempt to explore, say, internet-dating culture, transgender love or polyamory. Some of its humour feels regressive. Much is made of the chaperones accompanying two young Muslims on dates before a potential arranged marriage (“do I hear mosque bells?”). Maya (Nathalie Emmanuel) likens Kash (Nikesh Patel), a dishy banker of Pakistani heritage, to “Ryan Gosling dipped in caramel”. Contrast this with Mr Curtis’s treatment of his gay characters, Matthew and Gareth: presented, in 1994, as just another couple. Two years before this liberal newspaper embraced gay marriage, he has Charles (Hugh Grant) remark, after Gareth’s funeral: “All these years we’ve been single and proud of it and never noticed that two of us were to all intents and purposes married all this time.” Mr Curtis is also a much better guide to pomp. Since the rituals of weddings have not changed (marquees, ceilidhs, cringeworthy speeches, all the awkward hanging about), his script has hardly dated. His funeral is genuinely moving. Hulu’s “Love Chalet”-themed wedding—“sponsored by Hotels.com”—feels tired already. Mourners putting on Chelsea shirts and yelling “Arsenal sucks!” in memory of the football-loving deceased do not bear comparison with Matthew’s reading of “Stop All The Clocks” by that “splendid bugger”, W.H. Auden. Leave the Hulu series waiting at the altar, and run off with the original. “Four Weddings and a Funeral” is streaming on Hulu now