The Wichita Lineman: Searching in the Sun for the World’s Greatest Unfinished Song. By Dylan Jones. Faber & Faber; 275 pages; £10 and $16 THERE ARE more famous songs in the American canon than “Wichita Lineman”. From Aretha Franklin’s “Respect” to Bob Dylan’s “Like a Rolling Stone”, any number of tunes can claim to have been more influential than Jimmy Webb’s strangely truncated, elegiac pop-country ballad. The song wasn’t even finished when Mr Webb—who had made his name with songs such as “Up, Up and Away”, and forged a partnership with Glen Campbell, one of the most popular artists of the 1960s and 1970s, with “By the Time I Get to Phoenix” in 1967—sent a rough cassette of the 16-line number to the recording studio where Campbell and his producer were twiddling their thumbs, waiting for more material. Campbell and his band recorded it immediately. Mr Webb was astonished. But Campbell knew at once that this was the real thing. “When I heard it I cried,” Campbell said. “Every follicle stood up on my body...it’s just a masterfully written song.”  “Wichita Lineman” hit the airwaves on August 14th 1968—and as Dylan Jones notes in his engaging cultural history of its genesis and afterlife, it wasn’t even the most important song released that year. Mr Jones gives the crown to Steppenwolf’s “Born to Be Wild”, its music and message much more representative of the tumultuous year in which Martin Luther King and Robert Kennedy were assassinated, the Vietnam war ground on and Stanley Kubrick’s dark masterpiece, “2001: A Space Odyssey”, was released. But Mr Jones makes a convincing case nonetheless that the alchemical partnership of Mr Webb and Campbell, boys from Oklahoma and Arkansas, reached a mysterious apotheosis in “Lineman”. It is an evocation of the wide, flat landscapes of middle America; a hymn of longing and a celebration of the ordinary man. When you see someone working alongside a road, Mr Webb once said, “You can’t assume that a man isn’t a poet.” Mr Jones grew up in a village in Norfolk and is now editor-in-chief of GQ; his powerful affection for “Lineman” is evidence of music’s extraordinary ability to cross cultural and geographical boundaries. The book tracks through the music scene of the time, as the boundaries of pop, country and rock were stretched; it celebrates Mr Webb—now living in Long Island and still writing and playing—and Campbell, who died in 2017 after a long struggle with Alzheimer’s disease. Let’s face it: you won’t read this book if you don’t already love “Wichita Lineman”. Devotees will not be disappointed. It is fair to say, however, that Mr Jones buries the lede, as American journalists say: hiding the book’s single shocking revelation right at the back of the book. The eponymous lineman, you will recall, is a telephone repairman, listening to his old love “singin’ in the wires” and yet he is also “searching in the sun for another overload”. Overload is what you get with high-tension electrical wiring, not telephone wires. Mr Webb, it turns out, got his wires crossed. “Some of the guys from the union have scolded me about that from time to time, but it’s very hard to explain poetic licence to a union member,” Mr Webb says. Mr Jones’s paean of praise to Mr Webb’s perfect little song is full of gems such as this. Perhaps the book doesn’t quite earn its near-300-page length; whether the reader actually needs to follow Mr Jones on a Californian road trip, for instance, is a moot point. But Mr Jones’s tribute is nothing if not heartfelt. Whether or not Mr Webb added some “technical errors” to the song, there is no doubting the endurance of this compact, elusive American masterpiece.