THE MERCURY is rising, carbon-dioxide levels are increasing and a 16-year-old girl is leading a global movement to call attention to—and demand action on—an existential threat. Global warming threatens economies and the stability of societies. Political leaders have negotiated several climate-related accords over the years: the Kyoto Protocol, which came into effect in 2005; the Paris Agreement in 2016. But they are proving ineffective. Can a new generation come up with better ideas?  It is in this context that The Economist is holding an essay contest for people aged between 16 and 25, on the question: What fundamental economic and political change, if any, is needed for an effective response to climate change? The deadline was July 31st and the winner will be announced in September. And we have been deluged with excellent entries. We received nearly 2,500 essays from more than 110 countries, including places vulnerable to the effects of climate change, like Haiti and the Philippines, and as war-torn as South Sudan and Yemen. (This surpassed last year’s competition, which attracted around 1,500 entries from more than 65 countries.) Nearly half of the entrants are teenagers. The essays have offered a variety of responses to climate change, from declaring war against it to “greening” GDP by including the value of the climate in the national accounts. Some have called for elevating the votes of vulnerable countries in international forums and for empowering local governments to set environmental standards. Essayists found inspiration from figures like Greta Thunberg, a 16-year-old climate activist, and initiatives such as Bhutan’s development of a Gross National Happiness index. But no dominant themes have emerged. Entries have argued both for and against capitalism, for instance. Some blame consumers; others find fault with corporations. Those responsible for the mess should fix it, most essayists concluded, be they polluters, governments or “the people”. The essay competition is part of Open Future, an editorial initiative to remake the case for the newspaper’s commitment to individual dignity, open markets, limited government and a faith in human progress brought about by debate and reform, at a time when these values are under assault. A jury of internal and external judges will evaluate the submissions. The winner will be invited to attend one of three Open Future Festival events in Hong Kong, Manchester and Chicago on October 5th, and to participate at the UN Youth Climate Summit in New York in September. The winning essay will be published on Economist.com. The 20 long-listed finalists will win a one-year digital subscription to The Economist. Last year’s winning essays—on competition, immigration, free speech, political correctness and artificial intelligence—are available here.