ON STAGE in a medieval banqueting hall, a poet invokes the sea. The waves spawn “endless beginnings”, stories of change and movement, love and death; ancient myths dissolve and reform in her words, since “the water is in my thinking now”. Next to her, a pianist improvises a score in eerie dialogue with the verse. Her music summons not only rolling, surging chords but a silvery shimmer, like sunlight on the waves, produced by plucking or stroking the strings inside the instrument. On the wall above, projections of a painter’s watercolours depict a series of semi-abstract underwater forms. Built just before 1400 for a half-brother of King Richard II, the Great Hall at Dartington seems an unlikely venue for avant-garde musical experiments and collaborations. Yet this medieval building in the Devon countryside hosts such adventures every year during the Dartington International Summer School and Festival. This week witnessed the public premiere of “Nobody”, a new work by Alice Oswald—who has just been elected as Oxford University’s first female Professor of Poetry.  Her marine meditation interweaves the journeys of Odysseus after the Trojan War with the murder of King Agamemnon following his own return across the seas. Joanna MacGregor, a pianist, composer and the artistic director of the festival since 2014, partnered the text with haunting aquatic soundscapes. William Tillyer’s deliquescent art added a third panel to the multi-sensory triptych. “Nobody” brought leading figures from different disciplines together to make something new, rich and strange, and it epitomises the cross-border creativity that Ms MacGregor has nurtured over her five years at Dartington. The four weeks of the summer school, attended by 700 students, and the 95 concerts of the festival cover not only the core classical repertoire but jazz, folk, Middle Eastern and Latin American styles, as well as excursions into literature and visual arts. This year Adriano Adewale, a Brazilian percussion virtuoso, and Tamim al-Barghouti, a Palestinian poet, will perform as well as Emma Kirkby, a doyenne of Renaissance and Baroque singing, a cappella quintet Black Voices, and Neil Brand, a film composer and accompanist. This summer will be Ms MacGregor’s last in charge. Resident—and omnipresent—on the Dartington campus, she plays, teaches and leads. “It’s a very outward-facing job,” she says, but now, “actually, I want to face inwards.” She sneaks off to play Beethoven’s piano sonatas alone, though it is Bach’s keyboard works which have anchored her solo recital career. This week, at Dartington, she played Bach’s Goldberg Variations as a late-night gig: not as some nocturnal serenade, however, but a whirlwind of passionate invention, with blistering tempi and jazzy rhythms. Solo Bach, she notes, has a tradition of great female interpreters, whereas the Beethoven sonatas feel like “a very male presence” in the repertoire. Now she aims to scale summits such as the mighty Hammerklavier sonata. She plans, too, to write a book on the solitary musical practice that must underpin all that “outward-facing” activity. It will be, she says, about “the art of being alone”. The “Dartington Experiment” has sought to bridge the gulf between individual creativity and collaborative endeavour for almost a century. It originated in 1925 on a decayed medieval estate; rural improvement schemes, ceramics and glassware studios, arts education and social enterprise all helped turn Dartington into a byword (often celebrated, sometimes mocked) for high-minded bohemian pursuits in Britain. Now the “Experiment” and the Trust which guides it is seeking to renew itself for the 21st century, with a green focus on sustainability and environmental justice. The music summer school became a flagship for the project after 1948. Giants such as Stravinsky and Britten, Copland and Hindemith taught and performed there. Ms MacGregor had long admired its scope and aims, although she took over a hallowed festival in “quite a fragile state. I had a mission to pull it back from the cliff edge.” That mission has built on the eclectic Dartington spirit to forge links between styles and traditions. Workshops, classes and concerts allow disparate musicians to mingle, as do the works she commissions: “a simple way of bringing people together, so that they’re not in their separate silos”. Key skills, above all improvisation, unite Renaissance specialists with jazz soloists, folk fiddlers with Baroque keyboardists. Improvisation, she notes, was “absolutely part of what all musicians did” until the 20th century. Ms MacGregor’s Dartington programme strives to move beyond music’s “era of specialisation” without succumbing to the patronising banalities of “cross-over” or “fusion”. She finds musicians keen to break out of those silos; as are their listeners. “My experience of audiences is that they are profoundly responsive and creative,” she says. “They want substance.” She warns, though, that “what you have to do is gain their trust.” Sara Mohr-Pietsch, a BBC music broadcaster who takes over as Dartington director in 2020, will inherit a rich legacy of open ears and curious minds. Dartington International Summer School and Festival continues until August 24th