TWO PEOPLE stand side by side, the edges of their feet pressed together. Grasping each other’s wrists, they lean out to arm’s length, their backs straight; thus joined, they take a tentative step, and then another. If one partner falls, the other hauls them back up, keeping their feet in contact all the while. In Trisha Brown’s film, shot on Wooster Street in New York’s SoHo district in April 1970, the dancers evoke sailboats. Navigating the wide space of the street, their bodies are masts, their arms sails. “Leaning Duets” (pictured below) is a simple piece, filmed in grainy black-and-white. Brown had found an idea that intrigued her—walking as “a natural activity under the stress of an unnatural setting”—and she pushed it further. In “Man Walking Down the Side of a Building” (April 1970) a dancer, rigged with mountaineering equipment, descended seven stories perpendicular to the ground. In “Walking on the Wall”, performed at the Whitney Museum the following year, performers wore harnesses attached to the ceiling, and walked and ran parallel to the floor.  It was an embrace of “pedestrian movement”, the incorporation of the quotidian into choreography, and it expanded the idea of what dance could be. Indeed, the pieces proved influential beyond the field of dance, particularly on Philippe Petit, an artist who would walk between the Twin Towers on a wire in 1974, but also on film directors, who began to see tall buildings as a new and challenging backdrop for action scenes. Born in 1936, Brown grew up in rural Washington state, where she had few playmates but was immersed in nature. She moved to New York in 1961 and her inaugural artwork—the first of more than 100 choreographies as well as six operas—was called “Trillium” (1962), named after the wildflower which grew near her home and which she had tried endlessly as a child to transplant into her mother’s garden. Brown’s early pieces were not easy, even for those committed to postmodern dance. “Trillium” consisted of three movements, sitting, standing and lying down, all of it accompanied by a single screeching voice. She was once asked what dance meant to her. She replied with a formula: “Time, space and intensity = a constellation of elements that produces this ineffable thing that we call dance.” Dance, for Brown, was about pursuing “pure movement”: something “not functional or pantomimic”, she said, something which “has no other connotations”. It meant pushing the body to find a language of sorts, and her works often involved repetition, symmetry and patterns. “Do my movement and my thinking have an intimate connection?” she asked. “I don’t think my body doesn’t think.” She was aware of how strange that might sound to some: “If I’m beginning to sound like a bricklayer with a sense of humour, you’re beginning to understand my work.” Brown never wrote down her choreography, but she obsessively chronicled her works on film. Two years after her death in 2017, all the video has been digitised and it forms the basis of “Time, Space, Gravity”, a new solo show—her first in Britain—at Jupiter Artland, a sculpture park and exhibition space west of Edinburgh, Scotland, that opens with a new programme every summer. For Claire Feeley, the curator, the show feels very personal: “I trained as a mechanical engineer. I’m interested in structure, movement, energy and dynamic motion. I worked in the energy industry, on wind turbines and climate change. Their sheer sculptural quality is so synonymous with what artists like Trisha Brown do.” The show at Jupiter Artland will include two of Brown’s most interesting works: “Opal Loop” (1980, pictured top), a dance piece created with Fujiko Nakaya, a Japanese artist best known for her “fog” sculptures, and “Set and Reset”, a celebrated work from 1983 with a musical score by Laurie Anderson and set and costumes by Robert Rauschenberg, an American artist. “Set and Reset” is considered Brown’s masterpiece, and an important milestone in 20th-century dance, for its foregrounding of perfected improvisations and “release technique”—fluid movements engaging with momentum and balance. The Trisha Brown Dance Company will also perform “In Plain Site”, reconceiving some of Brown’s most dynamic short dance pieces at three locations in the park: in a stone coppice created by Andy Goldsworthy; in Phyllida Barlow’s quarry and—likely to be the most impressive element—on platforms in the water pools at the entrance to the park. It promises to be a fitting reminder of Brown’s groundbreaking originality and style. Jupiter Artland is open until September 29th 2019. “In Plain Site” will be performed by Trisha Brown Dance Company on August 9th, 10th and 11th