This is a by-invitation commentary in a series on “Hong Kong’s Future,” part of The Economist’s Open Future initiative, which aims to foster a global conversation across the ideological spectrum on vital issues. You can comment here or on Facebook and Twitter. More articles can be found at Economist.com/openfuture NOT THAT long ago, one of my principal concerns was that, in the context of a world in awe at the rising economic power and influence of China, Hong Kong was beginning to drop off the global radar. I have always considered it vital that the international community not lose sight of Hong Kong’s unique economic, social and political status under the concept of “one country, two systems”.  Now that the recent social turmoil has captured the attention of the world’s media, the only comfort to be had is that the causes and significance of the protests are so widely understood overseas. Yet some myths still need to be dispelled. The protests are not fundamentally directed against China, but they should be viewed against a backdrop of increasingly blatant interference by China’s central government in the governance of Hong Kong, a creeping erosion of Hong Kong’s autonomy and a progressive undermining of cherished freedoms of speech, of the press, assembly and intellectual thought. Accusations that the protests are being fomented and funded by “foreign forces” are entirely spurious. The truth is that the current protest movement is entirely homegrown and has developed some unique characteristics: a savvy use of encrypted social media to organise and direct activity, excellent teamwork and agile tactics. Rallies and marches have been organised throughout the territory to enable the widest participation by the general public. Recent events have led to a complete breakdown of trust in the local Special Administrative Region (SAR) government led by the current Chief Executive, Carrie Lam. Ms Lam showed a catastrophic lack of judgement. First, in trying to force through amendments to Hong Kong’s extradition laws that (among other things) would allow handing over criminal suspects to the justice system in the mainland: it is completely incompatible with Hong Kong’s rule of law. If that were not bad enough, she then stubbornly refused to respond in any way to the huge and initially peaceful protest marches that demanded the scrapping of the bill. This was the straw that broke the camel’s back and the trigger for more radical protesters to resort to violence. Inevitably, the police have borne the brunt of protesters’ rage and frustration. They should not be put in the position of having to defend fundamentally indefensible lapses in government policy. The police have come under increasing pressure to deal with escalating violence on the part of a very small group of protesters. Unfortunately, some well documented evidence of the heavy-handed use of force, some at close range and in densely populated residential areas, has discredited a once widely admired and respected force. I fear it will take years to restore the public confidence that the force enjoyed. It is difficult, at present, to see how the current impasse can be broken. The government is clearly banking on the protests burning themselves out once schools and universities resume classes after the summer holidays, but this grossly underestimates the momentum that has built up and is being sustained. If the Hong Kong chief executive cannot face up to the tough decisions now required in order to restore good civil governance and peace on the streets, then she should step aside. While young people are at the vanguard of the protests, the disaffection with the current administration spans a very broad spectrum of the community, prompting unprecedented public protests and petitions by professionals in the legal, education, medical and social services sectors, business interests, civil servants, church leaders, the elderly and mothers of young children. In response to government insistence that violence cease, last weekend’s protests passed off peacefully. However Ms Lam remains intransigent. The current situation could be significantly defused were she to accede to at least two of the protesters’ five demands that have broad support: namely complete withdrawal of the extradition bill—at the moment it is only suspended—and the setting up of an independent commission of inquiry into the causes of the current unrest and its handling by the authorities. Establishing the facts will enable the first steps to be taken to heal the rift in society. No one understands why she will not agree to withdraw the bill; this is (or should be) entirely within her remit. Despite assurances to the contrary, the police remain adamantly opposed to the concept of an independent inquiry which they believe would be primarily targeted at them. In the current situation, moral courage and decisive, proactive leadership is essential, but Hong Kong is essentially a rudderless ship. The captain has left the bridge and government policy appears to be dictated from Beijing. Full universal suffrage for the election of the chief executive and all members of the Hong Kong legislature, as promised to the Hong Kong people in their constitution, must now be a top priority. If the Hong Kong chief executive cannot face up to the tough decisions now required in order to restore good civil governance and peace on the streets, then she should step aside. Her reputation is in tatters and beyond salvation; her manifest lack of authority is a major impediment to resolution of the current impasse. While there is much about the current situation that is profoundly saddening, I am not without hope that, under the right leadership, Hong Kong can soon move forward once again. This can only happen if the central and local SAR governments face up to reality. The protest movement, composed in large part of well-educated and determined young people, will not back down empty-handed. Their future is at stake and they are prepared to dig in and fight for it. There are no quick fixes. The debacle over the extradition bill has brought into sharp focus the dangers of a government machine, with no electoral mandate, seeking to ride rough-shod over the views and interests of ordinary citizens who have no power to vote its leaders out of office. Progress on the implementation of full universal suffrage for the election of the chief executive and all members of the Hong Kong legislature, as promised to the Hong Kong people in their constitution, must now be a top priority. The government should offer to re-open discussion on constitutional reforms with a view to agreeing on a timetable to achieve this objective. For its part, instead of instinctively cracking down on the democratic movement, the government in Beijing would do well to demonstrate some trust in Hong Kong and seek ways to harness the energy and determination of its people for the greater good of the city and the nation. ________________ Anson Chan was the Chief Secretary of Hong Kong, the territory’s most senior civil servant, from 1993 to 2001, serving both the British colonial government and the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region government. Other guest commentaries in the “Hong Kong’s Future” series include: Regina IpChristine LohFernando CheungNathan Law Kwun-chungKevin Yam