WATCHING AN ADAPTATION of “The Secret River”, Kate Grenville’s prizewinning novel, on the banks of the Thames is a disconcerting experience. The stage of the National Theatre in London is framed with eucalyptus branches and bathed in a warm golden light. Projections ripple along the floor to mimic water; sea shanties blend into clan songs. Even before the play has begun, this simple yet striking set has transported the audience to the other side of the world: a quick journey, compared with the slow, torturous voyage that more than 700 convicts packed inside the boats of the First Fleet would have made to Australia in 1788. Many left lives on the river where the play is now being performed. “It’s there for the taking,” William Thornhill, a newly freed felon, says to his wife, Sal. He has spotted 100 acres of land north of Sydney, on the Hawkesbury river, and decided to make it his own. “But how can it be?” she replies. “What about those that are there?” The exchange foreshadows the atrocities that are to come as Thornhill, an English “riverman” who has worked on boats since he was a child, does not understand the land he so determinedly wants to make his own.  He tells Sal to look out at the sky and see the “same moon you see above London”; gazing upon the Hawkesbury, he imagines that a dirt track is Borough High Street. The rich soil has been attentively tended to for thousands of years by the Dharug people that surround him, but Thornhill rips up the yam-daisies that nourish their communities. He enforces straight lines of crops and square boxes of garden, trying to replant and reshape the land in the image of his home country. Thornhill refuses to acknowledge that the plot he’s staking a claim to is not, as Captain James Cook had declared from the shoreline in 1770, “terra nullius” (“empty land”). It is estimated that more than 1m indigenous people, comprising 400 different nations, lived in Australia before British settlers arrived in 1788. Thornhill’s indigenous neighbours tend the land; they make art on the rocks that surround them; they sing music that rings out over the cliffs; they build homes and communities. It is their place and the Thornhills and other settlers are interlopers. The decision of Neil Armfield, the director, to put white paint on the white settlers’ faces and limbs creates a sense of grotesque unease, showing the audience how they appear to the people whose land they’ve encroached upon. Like strange ghouls, they speak gibberish, look strange and wave tools menacingly. They are a nightmare that has stepped into real life. Ms Grenville wrote “The Secret River” after becoming fixated on finding out more about one of her ancestors, Solomon Wiseman. A lighterman on the Thames, he was sentenced to hang in 1805 for stealing some timber; he was given a reprieve and sent to Australia instead. He had become a free man, taken a plot of land, and become a success. He donned a top hat and tails and lived in a fine stone house with, as Ms Grenville writes, “a box of sovereigns at his feet”. Whenever she would ask her mother what had happened to the indigenous people who lived on the land where her convict-settler ancestors had built their first home, she would say that they had already moved away, into the country’s centre. The more research Ms Grenville did into her history and Australia’s colonial past, the more obvious it became that the family folklore was obscuring a story of conflict. “We had come here and displaced the people who were already living here,” she wrote. “Some of the dirty work had been done by smallpox and measles but we all knew there’d been violence as well.” Colonial massacre is an under-researched topic in Australia, but in March an ongoing project at Newcastle University mapped at least 270 frontier massacres over a period of 140 years—horrifying findings that, researchers point out, “were of no surprise to Aboriginal people who have long argued for the primacy of massacre as a critical factor in their dramatic population decline”. “The Secret River” is unflinching and devastating. It reckons with the brutal actions of early British settlers in Australia, actions that were for too long ignored by their descendants. “The Secret River” continues at the National Theatre, London, until September 7th