MARK WARNER, a Democrat who is running for a third term as Virginia’s senior US senator in 2020, is unlikely to repeat the mistake that nearly cost him his seat in 2014: ignoring his party’s increasingly liberal base. Having coasted to his first term in 2008, in part because of the business-oriented bipartisanship on which he was elected governor seven years earlier, Mr Warner recycled his policy-before-politics message against Ed Gillespie, a veteran Washington fixer. By doing that, Mr Warner missed a chance to generate enthusiasm among the state’s expanding Democratic base. Mr Gillespie came within roughly 17,000 votes of defeating Mr Warner, a mobile-communications multimillionaire.  Political near-death has a way of focusing the mind. As he tip-toes toward a re-election bid—Mr Warner has yet to formally announce but is avidly raising money—he is accommodating left-leaning Democrats who dominate the party with a measured embrace of some of their priorities, including easing the student debt crisis. When Mr Warner ran for governor in 2001 he promised to oppose any new gun control laws; he is now taking a tougher line on firearms. That stance has also been shaped by two mass shootings in his home state. In the most recent atrocity, in May, a gunman killed 12 people in the resort city of Virginia Beach. Mr Warner is getting a help from an unlikely source: President Donald Trump. As the senior Democrat on the Senate Intelligence Committee, which continues to investigate Russia’s attack on the 2016 election, Mr Warner is a thorn in the president’s side. This month he said he still hoped to secure testimony from witnesses who cooperated with Robert Mueller’s investigation but not with the committee. Mr Trump’s enduring unpopularity in Virginia, the only Southern state he failed to carry against Hillary Clinton, magnifies Mr Warner’s broad popularity. Mr Trump’s approval rating in Virginia has barely budged from about 35%. Ahead of a visit by Mr Trump on July 30th to Jamestown, Virginia, site of the first permanent English settlement in America in 1607, where he spoke in observance of the 400th anniversary of representative government in America, the Democratic legislative leadership staged a boycott of the president’s appearance. Mr Warner may not face much competition next year. So far, only one Republican has declared for the party’s nomination: Scott Taylor, a former congressman from the defence-rich southeastern corner of the state. Mr Taylor, a swaggering former navy SEAL with an incandescent smile, was swept from office in 2018 after a single term by an anti-Trump tsunami. In his announcement video, Mr Taylor didn’t even mention his Republican affiliation, though Democrats have pointed out his record of voting with the president. In a high-turnout, presidential year, Virginia’s Democratic reflex could be robust, helping Mr Warner and his seven congressional running mates. Still, given his innate centrist tendencies that still beguile the occasional moderate Republican, Mr Warner is wary of the cross-currents of presidential politics. He has yet to make an endorsement for the nomination. It is difficult envisioning him easily finding common ground with the party’s more liberal candidates, especially those whose seemingly profligate proposals—government health care for all and free public college—are inconsistent with his reputation as a fiscal hawk. Mr Warner can meanwhile affirm his partisan credentials in the policy realm—specifically, as a member of the intelligence committee—by highlighting Mr Trump’s perceived accommodation of Russia, its attack on the 2016 campaign and Republican resistance to calls by Mr Warner and others to shield America’s electoral system from further foreign interference. This is an unexpected role for Mr Warner. He became the committee’s Democratic vice-chairman by accident, when Diane Feinstein of California gave up the seat to join the Senate Judiciary Committee. Mr Warner’s assignment overseeing the world of spies, shadow diplomacy and cyber-espionage has allowed him to develop an unlikely skill set for a politician whose background in business has made him a voice on taxation, finance and regulation. In Virginia, meanwhile, Mr Warner wants to focus on helping home-state Democrats. This year, the state holds state legislative elections in which Democrats hope to take back the General Assembly. Mr Warner has taken on many of the fund-raising and voter-mobilisation duties that would ordinarily fall to Ralph Northam, the governor, who was battered by a black face scandal in February. In filling in for the governor, along with Tim Kaine, Virginia’s other Democratic senator, Mr Warner is simultaneously building up his own political apparatus, identifying organisers and activists who could be effective in next year’s campaign.