WHO MAKES art? In the past, outsiders looking at what Native Americans traditionally produced would conclude that men made most of it. After all the grandest, most eye-catching and figurative works—enormous totem poles and paintings—are usually made by men. Other products, such as finely designed beadwork on clothing, delicate pots or deftly woven baskets, are historically the realm of women. Outsiders often saw such items as mere craft, anonymously produced and perhaps less worthy of recognition or public display. Even if Native Americans themselves valued highly the items made by women, for many years non-Native Americans were less likely to do so. An exhibition of Native American art in Minneapolis, Minnesota, aspires to challenge such perceptions. “Hearts of Our People” at the Minneapolis Institute of Art (MIA) is exceptional in several ways. It combines both traditionally made items, the oldest from 500AD, and the newly fashioned, such as a restored 1985 Chevy El Camino lo-rider (pictured below, which draws gasps of admiration from visitors). The exhibition is also grand, including 117 objects from dozens of Native American communities across north America, including many items borrowed from art collections across the country. After its opening in Minneapolis, the show will tour nationally, moving to Nashville, Washington and Tulsa.  Most striking is the fact that the works are entirely produced by women. Jill Ahlberg Yohe, a co-curator at MIA, calls the exhibition a much-needed corrective to the idea that Native men (mostly) were artists. She argues that “more than 90% of art is made by women, among Native Americans.” The main impulse for the show, she says, is to demonstrate that this has been true “for ever”, and to claim that such recognition is “long overdue”. A committee of 21 experts, some Native and some not, selected the items. The pieces are arranged according to three themes: legacy, relationships and power. Such categories are vague enough to allow for a wide variety of items, including video installations, a rifle suspended in a tank of oil, dangling pieces of dried reindeer guts, decorated buffalo skins and sculpted marble. Among the most notable creations is a totem-pole sized stack of folded, commercially made blankets that almost reaches the ceiling of the gallery (blankets have great significance to many Native Americans, given as gifts, for example). It is a cartoon-like tower of dazzlingly different colours. The “legacy” part of the show, especially, could be likened to “devotional art” says Ms Ahlberg Yohe, who emphasises the painstaking and time-consuming effort involved, especially in the finishing of items. Folded pieces of porcupine quills are used to decorate clothing, for example, and doing so is extremely laborious. She notes that Native women have long produced abstract art—way before others recognised the art form—which is now reinterpreted by Native American painters. In the same section of the exhibition it is made clear that Native Americans were open to foreign influences and newly traded goods. They relished using Italian-made beads brought to America by Europeans, for example, or feathers traded from fellow Native Americans in South America. The ties between people and their natural environment is the subject for several artists in the second, “relationship”, portion of the show. Among the most striking items is a circular heap of broken bone china that is illuminated by a spotlight. On the wall beside it plays black-and-white footage of a hunt for buffaloes, a species that was driven to the verge of extinction. The buffalo were hunted in part for sport, in part for commercial ends—their bones used to make the china—and in part to destroy the livelihoods of Native Americans who could then more easily be forced to move by European settlers. Power is the theme of the final portion of the show. This includes references to old and recent protests by Native Americans, such as against a proposed pipeline in South Dakota, and to the fact that Native American women helped to inspire the wider women’s suffrage movement in America. The highlight of this section is a modern take on a wedding coat used by the Osage people. Such coats are hardly ancient—they were military coats given by European visitors to Osage men as a sort of diplomatic gift. As Osage men were often very tall, the coats were routinely passed on to women, who in turn decorated them. The one on show has depictions of DNA and other references to contemporary concerns. Is there a strong common thread to the exhibition? Through the ages Native women have developed skills, and found sufficient time, to produce intricate and often beautifully finished items of art. Recognition of their work may be belated, but it has been steadily growing. “Hearts of Our People” is the first exhibition that displays the work of female Native American artists on this scale, says Ms Ahlberg Yohe. That it is shown in such a large, prominent space will surely go far to deepening the wider public’s understanding of Native women as artists. “Hearts of Our People” continues at the Minneapolis Institute of Art until August 18th. It will then travel to the Frist Museum in Nashville, to the Renwick Gallery of the Smithsonian American Art Museum, Washington, D.C. and to Philbrook Museum of Art, Tulsa