IT HAS BEEN almost a year to the day since Boris Johnson, Britain’s new prime minister, expressed his disapproval of the burqa. Writing in the Daily Telegraph, Mr Johnson said Muslim women who don the full-body veil look like “letter boxes” and “bank robbers”. That people choose to wear them in public, he wrote, is “absolutely ridiculous”. Some Dutch lawmakers seem to agree. Last week the Netherlands became the fifteenth European country to implement some kind of ban on face-coverings in public places. Some countries have introduced national bans which cover all public spaces; others have passed bans that apply only in certain regions or cities, or in limited public locations, such as schools, public transport or government buildings (see map). While the Dutch law will have little practical impact—many government officials have said they will not enforce it—it is symbolic, nonetheless.  Advocates for “burqa bans” typically offer three arguments in their favour. Some, such as Paul Nuttall, the former leader of the UK Independence Party (UKIP), claim that face coverings of any sort pose a security risk because they make it harder for police to identify criminals. Others argue that public expressions of religious beliefs are an affront to secularism, and that “conspicuous” religious symbols, including Christian crucifixes and Jewish kippahs, should be worn only in private. Finally, some say that the burqa and the niqab, a similar Muslim face covering, are tools of male oppression, and that banning such Islamic garb promotes gender equality (albeit at the expense of liberty). Many people who might be persuaded by these arguments are put off by the company they would find themselves keeping. Before its passage, the Dutch law was championed by Geert Wilders, leader of the anti-immigration Party for Freedom (PVV), who has compared the Koran to “Mein Kampf”. Denmark’s ban was enacted in 2018 after the rise of the Danish People’s Party (DPP), an anti-immigrant populist outfit. In Austria, where there are reportedly just 150 women who wear the full-face veil, a ban was passed in 2017 with the support of the hard-right Freedom Party (FPÖ), whose leaders described it as a first step in a wider crackdown on political Islam. Yet there are signs that European citizens’ hostility to the burqa may be waning. In 2016, YouGov, a pollster, found that 62% of Germans supported a ban; since then this figure has fallen to 54%. In Britain, support for such a law during this period has dropped from 57% to 48%. Last summer hundreds of Danes, including many non-Muslims, protested in the streets of Copenhagen against their country’s new ban. Even Boris Johnson, who recently made headlines for his claim that Islam has left the Muslim world “centuries behind” the west, acknowledged in his Daily Telegraph column that a ban on the Muslim veil is “not the answer”.