MANY PEOPLE may feel as if they were raised, at least in part, by Jim Henson. “Sesame Street” provided a pre-school education; “The Muppet Show” offered an introduction to theatre and celebrity. Young viewers learned about myths and legends from “The Storyteller”, and were enchanted by the fairy tales of “The Dark Crystal” and “Labyrinth”. Lisa Henson, as one of the late puppeteer’s five children, really was raised by him and, to some extent, by the endearingly fuzzy characters he and his colleagues brought to life. “My brothers and sisters and I basically grew up on set,” she says. “My father loved to put us to work on whatever interested us. We built puppets, we performed. We were engrossed in it all.”  Little surprise, then, that her brother, Brian Henson, is also a puppeteer and director, helming “The Muppet Christmas Carol” (1992), “Muppet Treasure Island” (1996) and “Muppets from Space” (1999). Ms Henson, for her part, was always more intrigued by the financial and logistical bigger picture. “I’m so awkward on-camera,” she says, “I couldn’t even be a puppeteer off-camera. Even my hands would be awkward.” Her latest venture is a ten-part Netflix prequel to “The Dark Crystal”, a Tolkien-esque fantasy adventure which Henson co-directed with Frank Oz in 1982. After studying folklore and mythology at Harvard University, she became an executive at Warner Bros and then president of Columbia Pictures. Her father “offered [her] a job every year”, but it wasn’t until after Henson died in 1990 that she eventually rejoined her siblings in the family business, where she is now CEO and president. The company’s new series, “The Dark Crystal: Age of Resistance”, sees her coming full circle. In the early 1980s, when Ms Henson was in her early 20s, she was a production assistant on two Henson films in London. “I was on set in Elstree Studios with ‘The Great Muppet Caper’ while ‘The Dark Crystal’ was in pre-production across the street from our house in Hampstead.” At the time, “The Dark Crystal” was Henson’s most ambitious project, partly because its entire cast was made of latex, with not a human being in sight, and partly because of its bleak, post-apocalyptic mood. The story was set on the mystical planet of Thra, where the snaggle-toothed Skeksis sucked the life out of the Podlings who served them, and where the heroic, lamb-faced Gelflings had been hunted to near-extinction. “Sesame Street” it was not. “He’d been making such funny and light-hearted entertainment with ‘The Muppet Show’ and ‘The Muppet Movie’,” Ms Henson says. “People were surprised that he wanted to do something dramatic and scary, but he didn’t hesitate to go in that direction.” As dark as “The Dark Crystal” was, its fans never gave up hope that they could explore Thra again: the magical world had so many different races, rituals, languages and landscapes that a 93-minute film felt like a flying visit. “It’s a bit of a cliché to talk about ‘world building’,” says Ms Henson, “but ‘The Dark Crystal’ really did create a world. Lord Lew Grade, who produced ‘The Muppet Show’, funded my father and Brian Froud [a fantasy illustrator who was the film’s concept designer] to do seven years of research and development, something which you couldn’t imagine these days, so the world was developed and designed even before the story was worked out. The mythology you see in the movie is just a small slice of the mythology which stretches back thousands of years.” That mythology is explored in more depth in the Netflix series, a politically savvy swords-and-sorcery steampunk soap opera about a populace realising, at last, that it can no longer collude with its tyrannical rulers. It is everything that Henson could have wanted, not that he would have wanted to make it himself. “My father was quite restless as an artist,” says Ms Henson. “He saw the Muppets as a franchise that would continue, but otherwise he always moved onto the next thing. But we feel it’s very, very natural to make more of ‘The Dark Crystal’.” No doubt fans both young and old agree. “The Dark Crystal: Age of Resistance” is released on Netflix on August 30th