MIGHT TAYLOR SWIFT be pop music’s Alexander the Great? Her power in the music industry is undeniable; she has built a vast empire and amassed great riches. She is one of only two superstars who can still sell enormous amounts of music on CD (the other being Adele). Her last tour was the second-highest-grossing of 2018. Now she is seeking to conquer a new world: streaming. There was a period when Ms Swift was at war with streaming services. In 2014, after writing in the Wall Street Journal about Spotify’s unsatisfactory payments to artists, she withdrew her back catalogue from the platform. In 2015 she forced Apple to pay artists for music played during users’ three-month free trial period by threatening to pull her “1989” album. She returned her music to Spotify in June 2017, but when she released “Reputation” in November 2017 she waited three weeks before making it available to stream in order to maximise physical and download sales.  Her seventh album, “Lover”, was released on streaming services and in physical form simultaneously on August 23rd. Why did Ms Swift relent? The first answer is probably that she had won all her battles. While Spotify’s royalty rates are never going to match those from physical sales, it can still generate tremendous revenues for popular artists. And, on signing to Universal last year, Ms Swift was promised that when the company sold its stake in Spotify, it would distribute the money to its artists, without that payment being counted against any debts they had to the label. She had taken on those she felt were penalising musicians and she had beaten them. Now was the time to ally with her former foes. While many industry observers do not expect “Lover” to match the physical sales of its predecessors, it is already the biggest album of the year in the United States. Within two days “Lover” had recorded the largest first-week sales of any album since, well, “Reputation”, with around 500,000 copies sold. The album has performed well on streaming services, too. On Friday, Ms Swift held 14 of the top 15 spots on Spotify’s American chart; by Monday her dominance was less complete, but at the time of writing all of the 18 tracks on “Lover” were in the top 40 spots, including four in the top five. In Spotify’s global chart, she had five songs in the top 20, and a total of 11 in the top 40. “Lover” also broke the record for the most streams of a new album on Amazon Music. That suggests a third reason, the Alexander the Great theory: that Ms Swift wanted to conquer streaming as she had physical music and live performance. Before now, her commercial power has not translated to dominance of streaming, a situation not helped by her albums being either unavailable for long periods of time or not available immediately on streaming platforms. In 2017, when she released “Reputation”, though she sold 2.2m albums, she chalked up only 1.3bn streams, whereas Drake achieved 5.9bn streams against just over 600,000 sales. Streaming is only getting more important. In 2017, it accounted for 54% of music consumption, according to Nielsen Music, which tabulates American music sales; now that figure is 80%. There are still worlds to conquer.