ON A rain-drenched summer morning Rochester Cathedral is an ideal place to take shelter, and then enter another world. It is perhaps the finest surviving example of the thrilling Norman architecture that took hold in England after William the Conqueror landed in 1066. Friendly volunteers point out medieval graffiti and the frescoed ceiling, half-destroyed by iconoclasts in the 1650s. In the nave there is an even bigger surprise: young families enjoying a miniature putting green that fits neatly between the stone arches. The “educational adventure golf course”, offered free of charge this month, includes models of the region’s famous bridges and is fully in keeping with the cathedral’s 1,400-year-old role as a “centre of learning” where people can “take part in a fun activity in what for many might be a previously unvisited building,” explains a breezy announcement. Visitors might also “reflect on the bridges that need to be built in their own lives and in the world,” it adds, lest anyone think this is a purely secular diversion.  This summer has brought an especially rich crop of bizarre tales about the ways in which England’s 42 cathedrals draw in the public and raise funds. The majority of cathedrals charge no formal admission fees but urge every visitor to donate something. These historic structures vary enormously in their financial health, but none finds it easy to keep its fragile stone fabric intact. Last September the Archbishop of Canterbury, Justin Welby, offered one response by urging people to “have fun in cathedrals”, and the message has been taken to heart. Norwich Cathedral, dating from the same period as Rochester, has installed a helter-skelter nearly 60 feet (17 metres) high, giving people a close look at the cleverly-sculptured roof before they slide to the floor. A former chaplain to the Queen, Gavin Ashenden, grumbled that by offering such fairground frivolities, the cathedral had allowed itself to “poison the very medicine it offers the human soul.” The local clerics insisted it is a valid and creative way to share the Christian story. The well-run cathedral at Lichfield, meanwhile, has won plaudits by transforming its nave floor into a lunar landscape recalling the moon landings of 50 years ago. But there are limits to what you can do in an ancient place of prayer. Last year, Derby Cathedral drew a stormy reaction from the faithful when it hosted a series of films that included graphic sex scenes and paganism. The movies were not “showing God anything he hasn’t seen before,” insisted the building’s ruling dean in self-defence. In different ways, these stories highlight England’s unusual spiritual order. It is not a place like France where state authorities run (or fail to run) great churches, or a free spiritual marketplace like the United States. The established Anglican church is intertwined with the state, yet parts of it remain robustly independent of almost all authority. Cathedrals enjoy ancient privileges, and their autonomy goes back to medieval times when they also served as monasteries headed by an abbot. A cathedral is defined as the seat of a bishop, but is administered by a dean, along with a group of advisers known as a chapter. Bishops and deans are appointed in separate, elaborate procedures in which the monarch and the prime minister are formally involved. (Margaret Thatcher was the last prime minister who took an active interest in the appointment of senior clergy.) Even bishops have remarkably little say in the administration of a cathedral. Only as a last resort can the bishop instigate a draconian inspection known as a “visitation”. That is what happened at Peterborough Cathedral in 2016 when a dire financial crisis loomed. The dean duly stepped down, using a bitter farewell sermon to lament the “monochrome blandness” that was being imposed on the church, leaving no room for “colourful clerics and turbulent priests, the prickly prophets, rebels and reformers.” If there is indeed a campaign to suppress the colourful and turbulent, it cannot be accused of proceeding quickly. In the wake of the Peterborough affair, a high-level study of cathedral administration was undertaken and it delivered a report proposing changes in 2018. Both last summer and this summer, the suggestions have been picked over at the annual sessions of the Church of England Synod, grouping representatives of bishops, clergy and lay-people. In some form they may pass into church law next year. The biggest proposed change is that cathedrals would be regulated, at least to some degree, by the Charity Commission, a watchdog which keeps an eye on public-benefit agencies to make sure they are being competently run and sticking to their stated mission. The bishop would be given somewhat greater say in cathedral administration, and chapters will be expanded to include more lay-people, including those with financial expertise. It may seem perfectly natural not to rush to change an arcane regime which has its roots in early English history. But there is one area where the church needs to change faster, as was highlighted by a trial that darkened the otherwise cheerful summer activities in Rochester. This week an organist who had been in charge of music at two cathedrals, Ely and then Rochester, was sentenced to five years in jail for grooming and abusing adolescent boys. The Dean of Rochester, Philip Hesketh, said the news prompted “deep regret and a sense of shame” and “we are truly sorry”. There is no guarantee that any kind of external oversight would have avoided horrors like this. That will require not only a change of many procedures, but also a change of culture to one where vigilance is the norm and there is no room for anyone to hide behind the prestige of an exalted office.