THIS WEEK, as President Donald Trump celebrated the end of the Mueller investigation, he plunged into a fresh battle from which he is unlikely to emerge triumphant. On March 25th, his administration said that the Affordable Care Act, better known as Obamacare, should be permanently repealed. Similar efforts in 2017—when Republican majorities in Congress failed to undo Barack Obama’s health-care law because they could not agree on what would replace it—probably cost the party their majority in the House of Representatives in last year’s mid-term elections and gave a big boost to the Democrats. Another unsuccessful go at repeal could present another political own goal, damaging Republican prospects in the 2020 presidential election. This time the effort to root out Obamacare stems from a lawsuit rather than from legislation. In December, a staunchly conservative federal judge in Texas ruled that the law was unconstitutional. When Republicans passed their tax bill in 2017, they nixed the “individual mandate”—the surtax Americans have to pay if they do not have health insurance. Republican-led states then sued, arguing that this meant that the entire law—which was upheld on Congress’s power to tax—was invalid and needed to be struck down. The Department of Justice (DoJ) had previously struck a more muted tone, arguing that only a few provisions—like guaranteed coverage for people with pre-existing medical conditions—should be struck down. But this week the DoJ, at Mr Trump’s direction, announced that it was now in favour of striking down the entire law ahead of a hearing by the Fifth Circuit, the appellate court which will review the Texas decision. If Obamacare were repealed, the consequences would be chaotic. The health reforms it mandates are now firmly entrenched: 11m people have health insurance through the public exchanges set up by the law; 12m people gained health insurance through the expansion of Medicaid, the government programme for the very poor. Young people have become used to staying on their parents’ health-insurance schemes until the age of 26; older people have become used to signing up for insurance without facing price discrimination for any pre-existing medical conditions they might have. The political repercussions for Republicans of another assault on the ACA could also be calamitous. Some of them seem to recognise this. Mike Pence, the vice-president, reportedly opposes the move unless a suitable replacement plan can be in put place (which seems unlikely). Top congressional Republicans—who are no fans of Obamacare, but are highly sensitive to the party’s upcoming election odds—appear to have been ambushed by the move and tried unsuccessfully to discourage it. “Dear GOP: When Democrats are setting themselves ablaze by advocating for the destruction of American health care, try to resist the temptation of asking them to pass the kerosene,” tweeted Josh Holmes, a former chief of staff to Mitch McConnell, the Senate majority leader. On health policy, the Trump administration’s record is most notable for its failure to change Obamacare. The most consequential change it has achieved—allowing states to place work requirements on Medicaid recipients—could also prove short-lived and politically short-sighted. On March 27th, a federal judge (appointed by Barack Obama) ruled that the policy had to be thrown out in Arkansas and Kentucky. Kentucky’s programme had not yet begun; Arkansas’s had, and had resulted in 18,000 poor people losing coverage in the first six months of implementation. For some reason, prominent Democrats haven’t taken this issue up yet. It could become a potent issue in the run up to 2020.