ECONOMISTS HAVE long recognised that governments allow some firms to get too big, to the cost of the public purse. When they fail, governments must bail them out to avoid a big economic hit. That implicit guarantee, in turn, encourages firms to grow recklessly. They rake in the profits in good times; when things go wrong, the state foots the bill. Perhaps the best-known example of this was the financial crisis of 2007-08, when America’s Treasury was forced to bail out its banking system to the tune of $1.7trn to prevent economic catastrophe. But in some small countries, there is a new “too big to fail” threat: airlines. The financial pressure of rising fuel prices and falling fares on airlines is becoming increasingly obvious. Earlier this month Flybe, Europe’s biggest regional airline, was sold to a consortium led by Virgin Atlantic for just £2.2m ($2.9m), the price of a 2-bed flat in West London. The month before Flybmi, another regional airline, collapsed into administration. It is the latest in an expanding sequence. Earlier this month Germania went bust, following Primera Air of Latvia, Cobalt Air of Cyprus, Germany’s Azur Air, Lithuania’s Small Planet Airlines and the Swiss SkyWork last autumn. But the aviation sector most badly affected is Iceland’s. Icelandair and WOW, its biggest carriers, move five-sixths of the passengers flying to and from Iceland. Both are drowning in a sea of red ink. Last month Icelandair posted a loss of $56m for 2018. Meanwhile WOW, its low-cost rival, has almost run out of cash and is looking for a buyer. The fear in Iceland, and other small countries reliant on big airlines, is that taxpayers may be forced to bail them out. Bankrupt flag carriers, such as Alitalia and Air India, have long been propped up by their home state as a matter of national pride. But the sums involved as a share of GDP are insignificant. That is no longer true of airlines in Iceland and the Gulf. The revenues of Emirates, Dubai’s flag carrier, for instance, has now reached over a tenth of the country’s GDP. The loss of income from tourists who arrive by air could also be affected. Spending by tourists makes up over 10% of Dubai’s GDP, and a sixth of Iceland’s. The bankruptcy of WOW, which carries a third of Iceland’s passengers, would be a particular headache for Iceland. Its government reckons its collapse could wipe 3% from GDP and is making emergency plans in case it goes bust. The central bank has been buying up the country’s currency, which has fallen by a sixth over the past year due to worries about the health of its airlines. Speculation is rife that it could end up pumping money into WOW too. The hope for both Iceland and the United Arab Emirates (UAE) was that aviation would bring greater stability to their economies. Iceland, for instance, was previously exposed to volatile global prices for aluminium and fish, which still make up a third of exports. After an attempt to diversify into banking that ended with a massive financial crash in 2008, Iceland’s airlines sought to fill empty seats by promoting Reykjavik as a cheap place to connect flights between America and Europe, says Bjorn Oli Hauksson, chief executive of Isavia, owner of Keflavik airport. Similarly, Abu Dhabi, Dubai and Qatar expanded their state-owned flag carriers (Etihad, Emirates and Qatar Airways) aggressively on routes between Asia and Europe to hedge against the falling price of oil and gas, until then their main exports. Yet the reliance on building up hubs has resulted in airlines “putting all their eggs in one basket”, says Lee Ohanian, an economist at UCLA. The geographical advantage that Iceland and the Gulf states had as a place to connect flights once earned big profits. But this is no longer the case. New fuel-efficient jetliners, such as the Airbus A321neo and the Boeing 787, have made direct flights between smaller cities better value than connecting flights. Even so, governments are doubling down on their existing strategy. Thinking that safety would come with scale, Iceland’s government nudged Icelandair to take over WOW last year, and the UAE’s government urged Emirates to do the same with Etihad. But a look at their weaker rivals’ books has put Icelandair and Emirates off any tie-ups. Indeed, such deals could just cause bigger collapses and bail-outs down the line. A more sensible plan would be for the struggling airlines to join an international airline group to weaken the link between the fortunes of a single economy and the finances of a single carrier. Skuli Mogensen, WOW’s founder, had hoped that it would be rescued by Indigo Partners, a private-equity firm that owns budget airlines across the world. But on March 21st, reports emerged suggesting that Indigo had walked away from any potential deal with WOW. That is not only bad news for transatlantic travellers looking for a bargain—but for Iceland’s taxpayers too.