JORDAN PEELE'S writer-directorial debut, “Get Out”, turned a fairly well-known sketch comedian—one half of “Keenan and Peele”—into an Oscar-winning screenwriter and a universally acclaimed director. His follow-up, “Us”, may be even better. It is certainly weirder, more frightening and more ambitious, and it assembles so many startling concepts, themes and narrative twists that it is amazing that he had time to complete it in the two years since “Get Out” was released. What is more impressive is that Mr Peele become a father in that period (his wife is Chelsea Peretti, the comedian and “Brooklyn Nine-Nine” actress), as well as hosting and executive-producing CBS’s revival of “The Twilight Zone”. Perhaps it is his love of “The Twilight Zone” that is the key to his work. Both “Get Out” and “Us” begin with a classic science-fiction conceit reminiscent of Rod Serling’s original series. In “Get Out”, the conceit was: what if you were able to transfer someone’s consciousness from one body to another? “Us” asks: what if you were attacked by people who looked exactly like you? Anyone could make a film out of those scenarios, of course. But few people could make a film as fascinating as Mr Peele’s relentlessly tense yet deliriously entertaining chiller. The unfortunate protagonists are a happily married couple, Adelaide (Lupita Nyong’o) and the amiably uncool Gabe (Winston Duke, whose beard and glasses bear a suspicious resemblance to Mr Peele’s own). One summer they drive to a spacious holiday cabin near Santa Cruz, California, with their two daughter and son, but Adelaide is unsettled by vague memories of a childhood trauma we see in the film’s expertly constructed prologue. Visiting Santa Cruz's boardwalk as a child in 1986, she wandered away from her parents and into a hall of mirrors, where she saw a reflection that wasn’t a reflection: a girl who was identical to her in every way. Back in the present day, the family has one day on the beach with their bickering, boozy friends (Elisabeth Moss and Tim Heidecker), and then Adelaide persuades Gabe that it is time to go home. But before they can leave the house, the couple and their children spot four people standing motionless on their driveway, hand in hand. More sinister still, the strangers are their precise doubles except that they are wearing red over-alls and tan driving gloves: Halloween costume outfitters, start stocking up now. The interlopers are also carrying large pairs of scissors, which, alongside a fire poker and a golf putter, are soon used in ways that the manufacturers would not recommend. Again, any writer-director might have come up with this creepy concept for a supernatural home-invasion thriller, but the chances are that they would have relied on lurid gore and cheap “jump scares”, that is, sudden movements accompanied by a loud noise on the soundtrack. Mr Peele is an altogether more discriminating film-maker. He keeps deepening the characters, adding ideas and references, and taking the story to places you would never expect it to go. And, true to his comedy background, he puts in some excellent jokes, too. The closest forebear to “Us” is Joss Whedon and Drew Goddard’s ingeniously postmodern “The Cabin in the Woods”, but Mr Peele’s film is more likely to give you nightmares. The doppelgängers—“the tethered”—are grotesque caricatures of the family members: recognisably the same but demonically different. They are almost as pitiable as they are terrifying. The film’s most chilling sequence has Adelaide’s villainous replica delivering a strangled, croaking speech about her miserable upbringing, tears flowing down her face, while Adelaide sits opposite her, aghast. In her dual roles, Ms Nyong’o gives two such technically superb and magnetic performances that she deserves to be the first person ever to win Oscars for Best Leading Actress and for Best Supporting Actress in the same film. As Adelaide, she goes from being a subtly anxious wife and mother to being a wild-eyed warrior, cuffs around her wrists, blood staining her white lounge gear. This searing image is sure to end up on the cover of countless guides to the world’s greatest horror movies. But what does it all mean? Unlike “Get Out”, “Us” does not address race explicitly, even if it is still a statement of a kind, in today’s Hollywood, to present a group of black characters as a typical middle-class family. The film’s deeper concerns are unclear, but the title’s double meaning—“us” and “U.S.”—is confirmed when Adelaide asks the invaders who they are. “We are Americans,” her doppelgänger replies with a grin. Maybe she embodies the vast gulf between lives above and below the poverty line. Or maybe she represents the base instincts and desires we hide beneath our respectable exteriors. “Us” will prompt plenty of this sort of debate and analysis. But that may be to overlook the most important point about Mr Peele’s horror movies. They aren’t remarkable for being more politically engaged than almost anybody else’s. They are remarkable for being so much more fun.