A WOMAN’S CONSTITUTIONAL right to abortion has been recognised in America since the Supreme Court ruled on Roe v Wade in 1973. That ruling ordained that abortion was legal through the second trimester, which ends around the 28th week of pregnancy. In 1992, Planned Parenthood v Casey changed this to the age at which a fetus can survive outside the womb—around 24 weeks. But Roe’s protection of early, first-trimester abortions has never been in doubt. An increasing number of Republican states are seeking to challenge that. They are introducing bills that would ban abortion once a fetal heartbeat has been detected, around the sixth week of pregnancy. Because this is only about two weeks after a missed menstrual period, when many women do not yet know they are pregnant, “heartbeat” abortion laws, as they have been dubbed, are close to being total abortion bans. On March 22nd a “heartbeat bill” passed in Georgia’s Senate, and is expected to be signed by the state’s Republican governor. On March 21st, a similar bill was signed into law by Mississippi’s governor, also a Republican. These states are among a dozen to have introduced heartbeat bills this year. Around half of the bills have made it through at least one legislative chamber. That signals a shift in the fight against abortion at the state level, where pro-lifers have seen their biggest victories. Since 1973, conservative states have focused on chipping away at Roe by introducing regulations that make it harder to obtain an abortion. These include imposing waiting periods between a consultation at a clinic and an abortion (which can be onerous for women in states that have few abortion clinics; Mississippi has only one) and enforcing invasive, internal procedures like trans-vaginal ultrasounds. Given states’ success in passing such regulations, it might seem odd that they are now trying to overthrow Roe v Wade directly. Earlier this month a federal judge in Kentucky blocked a heartbeat bill the day the governor signed it. Mississippi’s law will also almost certainly be blocked. Why then are so many states persisting with this approach? Political posturing is part of the answer. “We will all answer to the good Lord one day,” tweeted Phil Bryant, Mississippi’s governor, shortly after signing the law. “I will say in this instance, ‘I fought for the lives of innocent babies, even under threat of legal action.’” In fact, the hope of legal action is another big reason why states are passing such laws. Their proponents hope that at some point one of them will make it to the Supreme Court, be smiled upon by the new conservative judicial majority there, and result in Roe being overturned. That is extremely unlikely to happen. The two justices selected by President Donald Trump, Neil Gorsuch and Brett Kavanaugh, are conservative Christians who have expressed strong pro-life views. But neither has said he wants to repeal Roe. And Chief Justice John Roberts, who is also conservative, is unlikely to want to overturn a 45-year precedent either. In recent months he has disappointed conservatives in two striking abortion rulings. In February he sided with the court’s four liberal justices to prevent the enforcement of a law in Louisiana that would require doctors who perform abortions to have the authority to admit patients to a local hospital (many do not). In December he, along with Justice Kavanaugh, decided not to take up two cases brought by states trying to defund Planned Parenthood, the biggest provider of abortions in America. Still, it is possible that a heartbill law will eventually come before the Supreme Court, especially if a lower court is split on the issue. And that prospect alone will continue to excite the many Americans who make a point of voting for pro-life politicians. For hard-line anti-abortionists, heartbeat bills are powerfully emotive. Signing Mississippi’s new law—which will come into effect in July if it has not been blocked beforehand—Mr Bryant described the human heartbeat as “the universal hallmark of life since man’s very beginning.”