VIKTOR ORBÁN became Hungary’s prime minister in 2010. Concerns about the illiberal conduct of his Fidesz party in power began not long afterwards, with the EU’s then commissioner for fundamental rights questioning its use of EU funds, judicial changes and constitutional reforms. Other European institutions as well as the American government and Amnesty International objected to measures like restrictions on election campaigning in the independent media. Last year the European Parliament endorsed a report by Judith Sargentini, a Dutch MEP, amply charting abuse of migrants, restrictions on press freedom, corruption and constitutional abuses. In September the parliament launched so-called Article 7 proceedings against Mr Orbán’s government over a “clear risk of a serious breach” of EU principles. It might therefore be said that no more investigation of his autocratic government is needed in order to reach a judgment on its acceptability. Yet an investigation is what the European People’s Party (EPP), the grouping of centre-right political parties in the EU that includes Fidesz, today agreed to commission. Delegates at the EPP’s gathering in Brussels this afternoon decided by 190 votes to 3 that Fidesz will be suspended from the EPP until the investigation’s conclusion; denying it voting rights or the right to attend party meetings. The trigger for this move was a taxpayer-funded poster campaign continuing the Hungarian’s long-running and overtly anti-Semitic campaign against George Soros, a Hungarian-born investor whom Mr Orbán accuses of trying to flood Hungary with immigrants. This was nothing new. But the posters seem to have crossed a line by also visibly and starkly attacking Jean-Claude Juncker, the EPP president of the European Commission. This prompted 13 member parties of the EPP, mostly from the north and west of Europe, to demand Fidesz’s expulsion—a move opposed by the group’s French, Italian and some of its other central European members. Germany’s Christian Democrat Union (CDU) and their sister Christian Social Union (CSU) party were decisive, coming down on suspension as a compromise. This move is just the latest in a series of inadequate responses by the EPP and particularly the CDU/CSU, its most powerful force. Manfred Weber, the CSU MEP selected in the autumn as the EPP’s “Spitzenkandidat” or lead candidate for the European Commission presidency in May’s elections to the European Parliament, has long hugged Mr Orban close. He has believed that expelling the Hungarian would push him into the arms of Europe’s far-right political families and that keeping him inside the EPP would allow the likes of the CDU/CSU to influence and moderate his behaviour. A nice notion for sure, but one that suffered from the misfortune of having no basis in evidence: Mr Orban seems to have gained confidence and swagger with every EPP red line he has swaggered over with impunity. The suspension of Fidesz is at least, finally, a concrete step. But it is still pathetically weak. Fidesz MEPs may continue to sit with the EPP in the European Parliament. The investigation, which will be led by Herman Van Rompuy, a former European Council president, seems unlikely to reveal details contradicting the conclusions of the myriad other international investigations of the Orbán government—conclusions that overwhelmingly show Fidesz to have routinely contravened the EPP’s supposed commitment to liberal democracy, pluralism and the rule of law. It is, in other words, a means of kicking the can down the road. This happens to suit Mr Weber very well, parking a pesky issue that was increasingly frustrating his bid for the Commission presidency until well into the autumn, when the election will be over and the allocation of the big jobs in the EU will be under way. Moreover, the decision to suspend rather than expel Fidesz could yet give Mr Orban the last laugh. At a press conference afterwards he gloated that his party had volunteered its own suspension and characterised the move as a mere piece of political theatre designed to sooth the sensibilities of the EPP’s more liberal-minded members (about which he seems to be right). He emphasised that Fidesz would continue to campaign for Mr Weber as Spitzenkandidat. And in the long term? Mr Orban has also threatened to pull Fidesz out of the EPP and join with right-populist parties like Poland’s Law and Justice (which, hypocritically, the EPP leadership refuses to admit over its own rule of law abuses). That he may yet do, ducking the formal expulsion from the EPP that is surely the only credible way to punish to his years of transgressions. Hungary’s strongman only understands strength—and the EPP continues to show little of it.