AMID THE overrunning flurry of talks between the EU leaders last night, Dimiter Tzantchev, Bulgaria’s permanent representative in Brussels, found a moment to tweet a photo (see below for the full image) from deep inside the Europa building. In French he titled it: “In the corridors of the #EuropeanCouncil”. The shot was remarkable for its composition and content. Half in light and half in shadow, like the figures of an early modern Dutch painting, a crescent of officials and diplomats huddled around a laptop to devise a new timetable for Britain’s exit from the club. There was Sabine Weyand, the brains behind the European Commission’s negotiating efforts, hands clasped. To her right: Declan Kelleher, Ireland’s permanent representative, peering through his glasses and thumbs tapping away on a phone. To her left: Philippe Etienne, a veteran French diplomat, and Uwe Corsepius, Angela Merkel’s dry-as-dust European affairs supremo, lips sceptically pursed. Among those crouching around the laptop were Robert de Groot, the Dutch permanent representative to the EU, and Clement Beaune, Emmanuel Macron’s “Monsieur Europe”. European leaders have embraced the photo. Michel Barnier, the Commission’s chief Brexit negotiator, retweeted it this morning with the cheery English caption: “Building European unity: collective and permanent work!” Their relish is hardly surprising. The shot captures an impeccably multinational, multilingual group of clever Europeans concocting a canny new timetable giving a catastrophically misled and chaotic Britain a last chance to find a way out of its own mess. But its true significance lies in what is absent from the photo: Britain itself. Having left other European leaders uniformly unimpressed and in many cases despairing in her comments at the start of the European Council summit, Theresa May responded to questions (to say she answered them would, judging by accounts of the encounter, be an overstatement) then withdrew and spent the following five or so hours waiting on the outside while the heads of the remaining 27 members of the EU, along with their advisers and EU officials, thrashed out a solution. Their magnanimity was also a humiliation: Europe’s second-largest economy was reduced to twiddling its thumbs in an anteroom while its neighbours decided its geopolitical and economic fate. Britons will have to get used to this. It is yet to sink in fully in London that Britain will become a third country once it leaves the EU. It will no longer enjoy the benefits, influence and priority accorded to members. Its weight will remain much less than the collective weight of the bloc on its doorstep; it will negotiate at a substantial disadvantage. Whichever sort of Brexit it ends up selecting, it will end up time and again waiting outside the room metaphorically, and often literally, while its neighbours make their decisions. If it leaves without a deal, it will rely on the EU to agree to emergency arrangements to limit the worst of the damage of the ensuing chaos. If it leaves with Mrs May’s deal, it will be subordinate to the EU’s preferences for a future relationship. Even if it opts for the softest form of Brexit, membership in the EU’s customs union and Norway-style membership of the EU’s single market, it will have to abide by the club’s rules and norms without a say in setting them. Brexiteers urged voters to “take back control” by voting to leave the EU. It would restore Britain’s sovereignty, they argued. In doing so they confused autonomy with control. Real sovereignty is not the absolute absence of interference. Britain can opt out of the EU’s interference at any time—and was always free to do so. But since its prosperity and security remain tightly interwoven with those of the European mainland, doing so would and will always come at a heavy cost in genuine control of its circumstances. The grades of Brexit are measured in the size of that cost: from the economic and thus social meltdown of a totally autarkic no-deal to the dignified-but-diminished passivity of a Norwegian arrangement. By voting for Brexit, Britain chose autonomy over control. It subjected itself to the interests, instincts and whims of the EU’s remaining states. In giving their flailing partner a last chance to find a sane way forward, the leaders, advisers and diplomats captured in Mr Tzantchev’s photo have shown wisdom and generosity, when they might instead have cut the country loose. Britain is lucky to have such enlightened masters.