SOMETIMES THE decision to change a country’s time zone can be political. Despite its vastness, all of China runs on Beijing time—a decision taken by Mao Zedong in 1949 to instil unity. (Pity the poor people of Xianjang province in China’s far west, where sometimes the sun does not rise until 10am, and lunch is taken as the shadows lengthen.) For almost three years recently North Korea existed in its very own time zone, half an hour behind its southern neighbour, in keeping with its hermit tendencies. But more often countries fiddle with the time of day for practical reasons. Some 70 countries, mostly in the Americas and Europe, apply Daylight Savings Time during the summer months. Europe’s clocks will spring forward once again this weekend. Yet last week the European Union voted to end this long-established practice from 2021. In the 18th century Benjamin Franklin mooted the idea of moving the clocks forward in the summer. But the practice really took hold during the first world war. Germany, France and Britain calculated that by adding an extra hour’s daylight in the evening, a saving could be made on coal. This, in turn, would help the war effort. Later, other benefits suggested themselves. It might increase consumer spending, as shoppers are encouraged to stay out later into the evening. It might even reduce crime. As the ne’er do well’s adage might go: “the longer the daylight, the less I do wrong.” For all that, clock-changing is unpopular. When the European Union ran a poll among its citizens, it garnered nearly 5m responses. Over 80% wanted time-alternating scrapped, and for good reason. Although it has not been proven conclusively, many scientists think that changing the clocks messes with humans’ circadian rhythms. It is, says one, akin to injecting a micro dose of jet lag. This may increase the chances of heart attacks and strokes. It could also be that car accidents increase, as drivers used to commuting in the daylight, for example, suddenly have to do so in the dark (or vice versa). Productivity may go down, too. Perhaps most inconvenient for businesses is the fact that countries may change their clocks at different times. America’s went forward three weeks ago. Any European working to an American deadline has had to reschedule their labour to finish an hour earlier than usual—and from Monday has to forget that process to go back to the old routine. So, will Europeans opt to stick with winter or summer time? This has not been decided. It could be that each country will choose for itself, though each is likely to take careful note of neighbours’ decisions. The benefit, it seems, is felt not so much in deciding how long the evening is, or how dark the morning. It is in keeping it consistent throughout the year.