RUDOLF NUREYEV was marked out as different from birth, delivered to a peasant family on a train in Siberia in 1938. He was unusual in coming to formal ballet training late, aged 17. He stood out at school in caring about passion and storytelling as much as technical precision. He embarrassed the Soviet Union by defecting in 1961, whereafter he became a global sensation. He died from AIDS in 1993. Little surprise, then, that the title of a new film about the dancer should seek to emphasise Nureyev’s uniqueness: “The White Crow” means “something other”. The film does not take a chronological approach to his life, leaping between Nureyev’s impoverished childhood in Ufa, his training at the Vaganova Academy and his time with the Kirov Ballet as its male star. The bulk of the action takes place in May 1961, as the Kirov performs in Paris. Nureyev (Oleg Ivenko, a Ukrainian ballet dancer in his first dramatic role, pictured) is enchanted by the city, and befriends Clara Saint (Adèle Exarchopoulos), a socialite, despite the orders of his handlers not to mingle with Westerners. It ends on June 17th 1961, as he seeks asylum from French police at Le Bourget airport. Despite the scenes being somewhat jumbled together, a clear picture of Nureyev’s personality emerges. He is charismatic, combining a searching intelligence with a reckless egotism and Mr Ivenko, who looks rather like his subject, captures this well. Steadfast in his belief in his own superiority, Nureyev is also prone to monstrous outbursts. In one scene at Vaganova, he spots a man watching the rehearsal led by Alexander Pushkin (Ralph Fiennes, who also directs). Nureyev turns on the man, whom he accuses of talking. He has no business amid such talent, Nureyev says, and he refuses to continue until the man departs (it transpires that it was Konstantin Sergeyev, the Kirov’s artistic director). In Paris, he is furious with an elderly waiter in a Russian restaurant for bringing his steak with sauce, but tries to force Clara to complain on his behalf. She considers him “the most selfish man [she has] ever known”. Yet the beauty of his ballet, which should have acted as a counterbalance, is not replicated. The dancing is rather ordinary—though the audience is shown many training montages—and the official performances feel low-key. Short extracts from classic works seem more dressy than dramatic, only hinting at the innovation, such as borrowing from female line and posture, that Nureyev brought to his art. This is disappointing given that the man is so famed for fiery theatricality. Before Nureyev, ballet “was lovely but boring,” Sarah Crompton, a critic, wrote. “He gave it a shot in the arm.” It was what, in the 1960s, made his face almost as recognisable as those of the Beatles. The film-makers’ decision to end with the defection, rather than the end of his life, means that Nureyev’s most celebrated and poignant years are left out. Nor does the viewer get a sense of the full implications of his decision to flee the Soviet Union. In the film Pushkin, when interviewed by the KGB, says Nureyev just wanted to dance, but questions of creative freedom are not probed throughout. Some burly men follow Nureyev as he frequents cafés and bars, and he gets told off by the Kirov’s management for flouting the curfew, but there is little sense of a tangible threat, or the horror of the punishment that might await back home. The scene in Le Bourget is the only one that feels truly tense. The film—inspired by a biography by Julie Kavanagh—is pleasant to watch, even if its narrative approach can grate. Mr Ivenko is undoubtedly glamorous, brooding when he needs to be, sometimes funny. Ms Kavanagh says that she feels “The White Crow” does some justice to the point of her book, which was to portray Nureyev’s obsession for dance, his artistic “tunnel vision”. But there could have been more sweat and physicality: this was, after all, the man who became the most famous dancer of the late 20th century. As it stands, the viewer does not quite grasp the importance of his legacy.