AT A Supreme Court oral argument on March 18th, justices sparred with four lawyers over whether the electoral map for Virginia’s House of Delegates violates the Fourteenth Amendment’s bar on racial discrimination. The hearing in Virginia House of Delegates v Bethune-Hill was bracing but, given its context and timing, rather belated. The map under scrutiny was drafted in 2011, following the 2010 census. Challengers filed suit in 2014 against 12 majority-black districts which, they say, were drawn with too much of an emphasis on race. The Supreme Court first addressed the matter in 2017, when it blessed one of the districts and sent the other 11 back to the district court for another look. On reconsideration, and with the replacement of one of the three original judges, the lower court declared all 11 districts unconstitutional. Now the justices will have the final say. If the map is found to violate the constitution’s promise of equal protection of the laws, well, most of the damage has been done. While Bethune-Hill was wending its way through the federal judiciary, Virginia used the map for elections in 2011, 2013, 2015 and 2017. With another census coming up in 2020 and a new round of redistricting to follow, the only question is whether the map will have one more go in 2019 before it expires on its own. But such a last hurrah may hold big consequences. Virginia Republicans are clinging to a 51-49 edge in the statehouse; the 2011 map could help them keep it. Meanwhile, a scholar’s alternative map—drawn in late 2018 at the lower-court’s request to fix the infirmities of the 2011 version—could push Democrats over the threshold in this autumn’s election, handing them the chamber and, if they muster a Senate majority too, the cartographer’s pen to redistrict for the coming decade. These political considerations remained largely in the background during the Bethune-Hill hearing. Upstaging them were two thorny legal questions. The more esoteric—but possibly determinative—matter asks who is authorised to speak for the Commonwealth of Virginia. Early in the litigation, Virginia’s attorney-general permitted the House of Delegates to respond to the constituents’ gerrymandering complaints. The tables turned when Ralph Northum, a Democratic governor, took the helm in 2018. Rising to challenge the House’s standing—or eligibility—to appeal was Toby Heytens, Virginia’s new solicitor-general. “Virginia law has been clear since before the Civil War that the state's attorney-general has the exclusive authority” to decide how litigation should proceed. It shouldn’t be the Supreme Court’s job, he said, to “referee” a tussle “within the Virginia state government”. Paul Clement, a veteran Supreme Court litigator who argued for the House of Delegates, called this position “deeply flawed” with “enormous consequences” for all-too-common situations when a state government’s legislative and executive branches are at loggerheads. Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg responded that the House of Delegates “isn't even the legislative branch; it's one house of the legislature”. Justice Sotomayor agreed. The 2011 map “doesn't belong to the House”, she said. “At best, it belongs to the legislature as a whole” or to “the people of Virginia”. But Mr Clement’s contention found some support from Justice Stephen Breyer, who worried that finding the House lacked standing would mean “nobody's going to be able to attack” a court decision adverse to a state law. All this led Justice Samuel Alito to suggest asking the Virginia Supreme Court to clarify who, exactly, speaks for the Commonwealth. The hearing did not get much clearer when it turned to the heart of the issue: whether the 2011 map violated the constitution. Virginia says it aimed at a black voting population in each of the 11 districts of at least 55% to satisfy the terms of the Voting Rights Act, a 1965 law that protects minorities’ right to elect “candidates of choice”. But the maps’ challengers said the 55% target was, in effect, too much of a good thing that diluted black voters’ influence in neighbouring districts. Areas with a bevy of white liberals, for example, ensure minorities’ ability to elect their preferred candidates with far less than a 55% share of black voters. But the House did not undertake district-by-district analysis to take account this so-called “crossover vote” or other factors, Mr Heytens said. According to Marc Elias, another lawyer arguing against the map, Virginia used a “one-size-fits-all” racial metric for all 12 districts akin to a loose-fitting suit rather than (as previous Supreme Court rulings have required) a narrowly tailored outfit carefully fitted to the facts on the ground. For Justice Brett Kavanaugh, Mr Elias’s position denies states the “flexibility” they need to abide by the terms of the Voting Rights Act while also avoiding a constitutional violation. If Virginia had aimed to create districts that were just “52% or 53%” African-American, Justice Kavanaugh said, it “would be hammered from the other side”. Mr Elias’s response was sensible if subtle: the key isn’t the percentage itself but the method by which the state arrives at it. If the House of Delegates had done “even a modicum of district-by-district analysis, this would be a very different case”. But a “blanket rule” with any particular racial target, Mr Elias, is constitutionally out of bounds. This exchange demonstrated another sense in which Bethune-Hill is a relic. In its 2013 Shelby County v Holder ruling, the Supreme Court struck down the section of the Voting Rights Act that Virginia says compelled it to use the target of 55% black voters. So when the next round of redistricting comes early in the coming decade, states with chequered histories of racial discrimination will no longer be required to get their maps approved by the Department of Justice. It is unclear what that new lenience will mean for minority voters. But one thing is certain: states will not be able to justify racial gerrymandering by purporting to comply with the old rule.