IN 1997 Gary Paul Morson, an American professor of Slavic literature, reflected on the work of Constance Garnett, the translator who introduced Tolstoy, Chekhov and Dostoevsky to the English-speaking world. “Every time someone else redoes one of these works,” he wrote, “reviewers say that the new version replaces Garnett; and then another version comes out, which, apparently, replaces Garnett again, and so on.” Much the same can be said about the King James version of the Hebrew Bible, for centuries considered the authoritative English translation. A new, complete translation seeks to set itself apart from both the King James version and from modern translations. Robert Alter first rendered the Book of Genesis in English in the 1990s, with no “quixotic” plan, in his words, to take on the whole Hebrew Bible. A professor of Hebrew and comparative literature at the University of California, Berkeley, Mr Alter had long argued that the literary aspects of biblical prose and poetry had been overlooked by scholars. In translating Genesis—and later, book by book, the rest of the Hebrew Bible—he sought to amend this. Mr Alter’s full translation, which took him 24 years to complete, was published in December 2018; in “The Art of Bible Translation”, a companion book published this month, he discusses the principles that guided his work. The King James version and the modern translations both fall short, he argues. The modern translations, taken on by committees with philological expertise, often focus on getting the lexical meanings of the text right, but lack literary sensitivity. They underestimate readers and over-explain the text, Mr Alter says, disambiguating the many possible meanings of a word in favour of a single one, resulting in a “deceptive antiseptic clarity”. The committee responsible for the King James version, on the other hand, while more loyal to the original Hebrew in its literalism, lacked philological expertise. And moreover, for all their fine sense of English, the language has changed somewhat since 1611, when their translation was first published. “The Art of Bible Translation” focuses on five main linguistic elements: syntax, word choice, sound play and word play, rhythm and the language of dialogue. For each of these, Mr Alter provides examples that illustrate the challenges involved, showing how a literary sensibility can affect the outcome for the better. The story of Jacob and Esau, for example, is used to demonstrate the importance of maintaining the original word choice. Esau, hungry from an unsuccessful hunt, enters Jacob’s tent, where his brother is preparing a lentil stew. In Mr Alter’s translation, Esau says: “Let me gulp down some of this red red stuff, for I am famished.” The original Hebrew simply reads ha’adom ha’adom hazeh, “this red-red”—but the King James version and the New Jerusalem Bible opt for “that same red pottage”. In the attempt to familiarise the text to English readers, Esau’s inarticulate crudeness is lost. “Foreignising” the text, Mr Alter argues, is preferable to “domesticating” it. A distinctive feature of biblical syntax is the use of parataxis: the linking of clauses by and rather than by subordinate conjunctions such as because or although. The King James translators, presumably to avoid tampering too much with the word of God, tended to preserve parataxis. Modern English translations, however, largely dispense of it, in favour of a supposed clarity—thus losing what Mr Alter calls the “beautifully uncoiling rhythmic sequence” of the original, as well as the artful ambiguity created by the absence of a direct causal link. Other sins against the ancient text include “airbrushing” the original Hebrew, attempting to smooth over its concrete simplicity with the reflexes and embellishments of a copy editor. Mr Alter prefers short, blunt Anglo-Saxon words, which are closer to the simple Hebrew in effect, to those with Latin or Greek origins. Mr Alter rightly notes that many recent translations seem a bit detached from modern literature. Still, there are instances in which a greater sensitivity to pop culture would have benefitted his own work. After King Saul fails to obey the word of God, and takes his enemies’ sheep and cattle rather than killing them outright, he is informed by the prophet Samuel that he has fallen out of favour. In Mr Alter’s rendering, Samuel asks: “And why did you not heed the voice of the LORD, for you pounced on the booty and did evil in the eyes of the LORD?” To younger readers, pouncing on booty might sound less like a biblical sin and more like a lyric by Nicki Minaj. Given that Mr Alter is 83 years old, this is understandable, but it further illustrates how mercurial language can be, and how even the most careful translations can miss the mark on occasion. Mr Alter’s translation is unlikely to unseat the King James version, if only for reasons of historical attachment. Yet even if it is sometimes hard to share in Mr Alter’s outrage at the “egregious choices” some other Bible translations have made, his argument for a more literary rendering is sound and convincing. “The Art of Bible Translation” is a compelling book, which demonstrates both the extent of Mr Alter’s mastery and the degree of care and attention he put into this momentous project. We talked to Robert Alter for a podcast (below). Skip to 17:33 to listen to the interview.  