IN THE poster for “Abdullah’s Harem” (1955), a British comedy film, a man in a fez clutches strings of precious stones while 13 women in diaphanous bikinis pout and pose seductively. “You Know What Sailors Are” (1954), another British production, follows three inebriated officers who cause a major international incident and features three women dressed as belly dancers. The words “What surprises! What spectacle! What music! What lavish fun!” are splashed across the print. Other posters boast titles such as “Action in Arabia”, “Operation Camel” and “Babes of Baghdad”. These items are on show at Dar el-Nimer for Arts and Culture, a non-profit gallery in Beirut, as part of an exhibition of the posters used to advertise Western films set in the Arab world. Featuring more than 100 prints dating from the 1920s to the end of the 1970s, “Thief of Baghdad” (named after an American silent film from 1924) sheds light on Western attitudes to the Middle East, and shows how the imagery of 19th-century Orientalist art suffused 20th-century cinema. One section of the exhibition is dedicated to adaptations of “One Thousand and One Nights”, a collection of Arabic folk tales. The adventures of Aladdin and Sinbad, Ali Baba and Scheherazade are illustrated with flying carpets, genies, camels and elephants, set against cities with endless minarets and domes. The magical tropes of these ancient tales prove influential, picked up for other, supposedly realist, genres of film. They blend with the work of 19th-century French painters such as Jean-Auguste-Dominique Ingres and Eugène Delacroix, who depicted scenes—many of them imagined—of harems, markets and violence. Seductive sheikhs, submissive slaves, damsels in distress and swarthy men brandishing scimitars abound. Evocations of Cairo, Baghdad and Beirut bear no real resemblance to the cities themselves. Abboudi Abou Jaoudé, the curator of the show, has been collecting the posters since he was a teenager. Although he hasn’t seen all the films on which the posters in his collection are based, he loves the artwork and is fascinated by its symbolism. He explains that the artists often did not get the chance to watch the films they were tasked with selling. Instead, they drew whatever they thought would entice and excite audiences, drawing on their own—often limited, often inaccurate—knowledge of the Middle East. That is made clear in two posters advertising an Italian film set in Lebanon, “La Castellana del Libano” (1956), about “two scientists exploring uranium on land belonging to a countess” who become “entangled in a web of espionage”. One features a white woman surrounded by dark-skinned, robed gunmen, who ride camels in front of a domed palace. The other shows men dressed as Bedouins galloping on horseback across a desert with three oil rigs. Mr Abou Jaoudé laughs fondly, explaining that neither of these scenes features in the film—and that Lebanon does not have any deserts or oil rigs. As well as drawing attention to recurring symbols and figures, the exhibition also demonstrates how the Middle East served as a blank canvas on which to project Western concerns and desires. Espionage thrillers made during the cold war pitted American spies against KGB operatives, and the characters pursued each other across the historic sites of the Arab world. Slaves and dancers usually had blond hair and pale skin, catering to European and American tastes (and fantasies). “Dream Wife” (1953), an American comedy starring Cary Grant and Deborah Kerr, focused on a man who breaks off a relationship with his career-driven girlfriend to marry a dutiful Arab princess who will enjoy “having babies and taking care of a man”. The poster captures the actor lounging in a tuxedo with a red fez on his head and a water pipe in his mouth, dreaming of being carried in a litter by two curvaceous veiled ladies. Mr Abou Jaoudé believes it betrays an American fascination with the idea of having multiple wives as well as a perception of Arab women as subservient to their husbands. His favourite exhibits are the posters in Arabic, used to promote the films in the Middle East itself. Local artists often copied the original Western prints but offered variations on the genies, thieves and flying carpets. And despite their troubling racial overtones, the films were popular across the region. Mr Abou Jaoudé says that they were not seen as political commentary but as pure entertainment and escapism; he points out that whereas white-saviour narratives are prevalent throughout the decades, most of the antagonists in these mid-century films are either fairy-tale villains or Soviet spies. After 1967 and the Arab-Israeli war, that changed; Arab characters were often cast in the part of the bad guys. Since 9/11, they have increasingly been portrayed as terrorists or extremists. For that to change, he says, more films need to explore the region in nuanced ways. For the most part, those films are being made at home rather than abroad, and they are succeeding internationally. In the last year, Egyptian, Syrian and Lebanese films with local directors, actors and storylines have won awards at Sundance, Cannes and Venice. Lebanese dramas have been shortlisted for the Best Foreign Language Oscar two years in a row. “Thief of Baghdad” is an entertaining and surprising show, and its exhibits are beautiful, despite their garish colours and clichéd designs. Perhaps it will inspire more artists and film-makers to tell their own stories. “Thief of Baghdad” runs until May 25th at Dar el-Nimer for Arts and Culture in Beirut