FEW PAINTERS can have been saddled with a more inappropriate pseudonym than “Tintoretto”. With its tinkling consonants, his nickname—“little dyer”, referring to the profession of his father—might have sat well on a creator of Rococo pastoral idylls, but is hopelessly inappropriate for an artist of such earnest intent and almost inhuman gusto. Tintoretto (born Jacopo Comin) painted faster and bigger than any of his Venetian contemporaries. He was possessed of monstrous ambition, not just for fame and reward, but for lasting artistic glory. For a celebration of the 500th anniversary of his birth in 1518 or 1519, a major exhibition has travelled from Venice to Washington. “Tintoretto: Artist of Renaissance Venice” opened at the National Gallery of Art (NGA) on March 24th and runs until July 7th. Astonishingly, it is the first-ever retrospective in America of the painter, an artist that some critics have put in the first rank of Renaissance Masters. John Ruskin thought Tintoretto the equal of Michelangelo; subsequent fans included Jean-Paul Sartre, who claimed him for the proletariat. But various factors have contributed to a decline in Tintoretto’s popularity over the past century and a half. One is the sheer difficulty of staging an exhibition that offers a representative selection of his work. Many of his greatest paintings have to be admired in the poorly lit churches of Venice because they adorn walls and ceilings, or are simply too enormous to go through the doors or fit in the rooms of modern exhibition spaces. Another obstacle has been the attribution to Tintoretto of scores of works of variable quality, often created by his assistants and imitators. The two curators of the Washington show, Robert Echols, a scholar, and Frederick Ilchman, who chairs the Art of Europe department at the Museum of Fine Arts in Boston, have also been responsible for a drastic reduction in Tintoretto’s accepted oeuvre. They have rejected more than 150 works, including some well-known paintings such as “Christ and the Adulteress” (it continues to be exhibited at Palazzo Barberini in Rome as a work by Tintoretto). Many of the master’s paintings have also suffered from dirt and decay and, in some cases, coats of varnish deliberately applied to give them more of an “Old Master” look. Several of the works on display in Washington have been restored to their original brightness. “Tintoretto as a brilliant colourist is going to be a revelation to many people,” Mr Echols says. The show comprises 46 paintings, most of which have come from the vast, twin-sited exhibition at the Doge’s Palace and the Accademia in Venice. Others are already on display at the NGA. Some have been loaned, including his “The Last Supper” (pictured, above), one of Tintoretto’s most audacious and enigmatic works, taken from the church of San Trovaso in the Dorsoduro district of Venice. Tintoretto put his slightly ragged apostles in the back room of a tavern; it looks as if—until the moment the painting captures, when Jesus tells them that one of them will betray him—they have not been stinting on the wine. A cat is hunting for scraps under the table. In one corner is a mysterious figure who, it has been speculated, is the artist’s much-loved daughter, Marietta, who worked with him in his studio. “The Last Supper” is a counterpoint to the notion that Tintoretto is all maudlin Madonnas and saints with uplifted eyes. So too is a section of the show devoted to his portraits. “I hope people will come out of this exhibition thinking that he was one of the great portraitists of the 16th century along with Titian and Bronzino,” Mr Ilchman says. Maybe. Some of his portraits are formal and disclose little of their subjects’ inner selves. But this is unquestionably an exhibition that does justice to Tintoretto’s thundering genius.