MEET ARMANDO. He is five years old, looks alert—thanks to some striking red eyes—and has a neck coloured with vibrant green and pink streaks. He is also a champion. In the past year he has won the equivalent of national, European and Olympic gold medals. When put up for sale online, he attracted interest from all around the world, as well as his native Belgium. His new, Chinese owner paid €1.25m ($1.41m) for him, more than three times the previous online-auction record. Armando is the world’s most expensive racing pigeon. But why have elite birds become so costly? Pigeon-racing has its roots in Belgium, where the first long-distance races were held in the 19th century and where colombophiles (pigeon fanciers) were common. The reputation of Belgian birds as the world’s finest is a consequence of myriad generations of breeding and careful handling. But the biggest market for prize pigeons is China. Keeping pigeons and improving their homing instincts has long been popular, but racing the birds was banned during the Cultural Revolution because of its association with capitalism. The sport has boomed recently, especially at the top end. All the eye-popping purchases of elite birds, such as Bolt (€310,000 in 2013), Nadine (€400,000 in 2017) and New Bliksem (€376,000 in 2018), have been made by Chinese bidders. Armando’s price was driven up by two competing Chinese buyers. Indeed, pigeon racing in China is witnessing the same price inflation as many other asset classes, from fine wine to footballers. A supporting infrastructure has sprung up that encourages lavish spending on pedigree homers. The Pioneer International Club, based in Beijing, hosts a series of races known as the Iron Eagle, where pigeons fly distances of up to 500km for prize pots worth millions of dollars. The luxury-goods market in China, which includes splurging on expensive hobbies, such as prize pigeons, could be squeezed this year as the US-China trade war rumbles on and consumers put spending on hold. For months manufacturers have warned about weakening demand. That said, surveys have suggested that spending plans among the very wealthiest remain buoyant. And the market for the priciest Belgian birds is highly concentrated, limited to a handful of fanciers whose prospects are crucial for the market. What is clearer is that Armando’s days of long-distance flying are over. Racing is dangerous, even for experienced birds, and expensive pigeons bought at auction are often not risked again. Armando’s value lies in his genes. He will be matched with a pedigree hen, in the hope that his offspring prove similarly adept. Seven of Armando’s descendants were sold in the same auction as he was, raising over €150,000. Despite his hefty price tag, the world’s most expensive pigeon could eventually turn a profit.