HERE ARE two stories about religion, free speech and higher education in the United Kingdom. Both make troubling news for anyone who thinks that students should be exposed to a broad range of ideas, including some they won’t agree with. One concerns a global celebrity, the other a man who is relatively little known outside his own specialist world. Jordan Peterson, a Canadian psychology professor and conservative culture warrior, revealed on March 20th that an invitation to take up a visiting fellowship at Cambridge University had been withdrawn. The University’s Divinity Faculty confirmed the decision in a laconic statement: “We can confirm that Jordan Peterson requested a visiting fellowship, and an initial offer has been rescinded after a further review.” Mr Peterson had quite a lot more to say about the matter. He recalled that he had visited the British city of Cambridge last autumn and made a successful appearance at a famous debating society. He had also had some enjoyable conversations with members of the Divinity Faculty which made him think that collaborating with them might be beneficial for one of his longer-term projects: a series of commentaries on the Hebrew scriptures which had already attracted millions of followers. (With his pronouncements on self-help and his appeal to relatively old-fashioned ideas about gender, the professor reaches far more people through the internet than will ever crowd into a lecture room.) He had some quite caustic things to say about the decision to disinvite him. Ideologically addled or otherwise, the Cambridge University Student Union hailed news of the dis-invitation, saying, “[Mr Peterson’s] work and views are not representative of the student body and...we do not see his [potential] visit as a valuable contribution to the University, but one that works in opposition to the principles of the University.” Mr Peterson dismissed this statement as barely intelligible. As it is, the Cambridge Divinity Faculty has always encompassed a wide range of metaphysical beliefs, from Christian to Muslim to agnostic. At Queen’s University Belfast, by contrast, the teaching of theology to undergraduates has at least until recently been delegated to one Christian denomination. The Union Theological College, a Presbyterian-run institution, has been responsible for delivering theology classes and hence for deciding who will teach that subject. A liberal-minded minister-cum-academic, Laurence Kirkpatrick, has just been fired from his post at the institution where he has worked for 22 years. The Presbyterian professor has been in dispute with the college since a radio interview he gave in June 2018 when he said its teaching staff were almost entirely elderly and male (“we must look like escapees from an old people’s home”) and also questioned the church’s increasingly hard-line teaching on same-sex relationships. (At the time, Northern Ireland’s Presbyterians were in the process of loosening links with their Scottish brethren in protest at the latter’s increasingly gay-friendly stance. Mr Kirkpatrick said: “I’d be broken-hearted if anyone said I’d been bigoted against a Catholic or gay student.”) This led to his suspension; in the last few days he has been formally dismissed. Apparently because of concerns about the way Mr Kirkpatrick was being treated, Queen’s University suspended the introduction of new students to the college last December. That could be a step towards the complete severance of connections between the University and the theological outfit. The professor said he was told by the college that he had been responsible for “fracturing” its relationship with the university. His radio interview had brought both the college and the Presbyterian church into “disrepute”, according to his letter of dismissal. He has said he will appeal to the Employment Tribunal. What Mr Peterson and Mr Kirkpatrick have in common is that both have confronted boldly the reality that theology in its conventional form is of little interest to young people. They may have rather different ideas on how that lacuna should be filled. But in both cases, there are people who do not want them to be given a hearing.