AMERICA’S LARGEST source of methane emissions is oil and gas production. In the 20 years after it is released, the powerful greenhouse gas traps over 80 times more heat in the atmosphere than carbon dioxide does. Now the Trump administration is seeking to roll back regulations imposed in 2016 that seek to limit it. At the end of August the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) proposed eliminating rules covering both new and existing sources of methane emissions, and exempting companies from routine checks of their transportation and storage facilities for methane leaks. Oil and gas producers are divided in their reaction. Big producers with international operations, such as BP, Royal Dutch Shell and ExxonMobil, want the regulations to remain. Small producers are cheering their removal. The matter is likely to end up in the courts.  Some lobbyists argue that the methane-emission rules are in fact redundant. Guidance introduced in 2012 on other smog-forming chemicals indirectly limited methane emission, too, at least from new sources of oil and gas. Erik Milito, a vice-president at American Petroleum Institute, says that as old sources are depleted, “90% of all production will become regulated by 2023”. API, which represents more than 600 oil and gas companies, argues that the Obama-era rules directly covering methane are therefore not necessary. But for oil and gas majors, the question is partly one of image. These firms seek to present themselves as leaders in an energy transition away from coal. “Shell remains committed to achieving our target of maintaining methane-emissions intensity below 0.2% by 2025 for all operated assets globally,” says Gretch Watkins, Shell’s US president. In 2017 Shell began implementing a voluntary leak-detection and repair programme. Oil majors regard methane leakage as a “solvable problem',' says Mark Brownstein of the Environmental Defence Fund, a campaigning group. “Last year we announced our support for the direct regulation of methane emissions for new and existing oil and gas facilities,” says Staale Gjervik of ExxonMobil. “That hasn’t changed.” That target of 0.2%, which measures the volume of emissions per unit of production, was set in 2018 by the Oil and Gas Climate Initiative, an independent coalition of 13 major oil and gas companies, as part of its efforts to tackle global warming. Opposing methane regulation would weaken the argument that natural gas fits into a low-carbon future. And there is a business case for taking methane leaks seriously, too: they indicate that a company is letting valuable fossil fuel escape. Such leaks cost the industry in America an estimated $2bn a year. The majors’ deep pockets mean they can afford methane-detection programmes. But for smaller firms and new entrants, they are a steep barrier to competition and entry. The calculations are all reversed for small producers. They typically own marginal wells, which are near the end of their productive life and viable only if commodity prices are high. The Obama-era regulations put 770,000 marginal wells at risk. Though such mom-and-pop operations may produce just 10-15 barrels of oil per day, they can last up to 40 years. They account for 10% of America’s oil production and 11% of its gas production. According to Mark Boling, a former vice-president of Southwestern Energy Group, such wells make a significant contribution to the industry’s methane emissions. The EPA estimates the regulatory rollback would save the oil and gas industry $17m-19m per year. EPA’s proposal is open for public comment for 60 days before it can be reviewed. The plan would probably be finalised early next year, just as election season heats up. Only after that can environmental advocates prepare their legal strategies. A court battle probably lies ahead. Small producers won’t be celebrating just yet.