PABLO PICASSO often worked in close proximity to food. As a young artist he would eat, drink and sketch in a café in Barcelona. Later it was the kitchen in Villa La Californie, Cannes, or the one in Rue des Grands-Augustins, Paris, that acted as a makeshift studio. Little surprise that in 1948 he rendered his Parisian kitchen in monochrome lines and abstract shapes, and that the foodstuffs that appeared on his plate appeared on his canvasses, too. David Douglas Duncan, an American photojournalist, recalled watching Picasso devour sole meunière, licking the bones clean, then placing the skeleton on a slab of wet clay to make a plate later entitled “Bullfight and Fish” (1957). An exhibition at the Picasso Museum in Barcelona last year explored the importance of cuisine in the artist’s work; in June La Fabrica collected that material in “Picasso’s Kitchen”, a monograph. The book argues that food and kitchen utensils grounded the abstraction of his paintings in everyday life, and the produce Picasso favoured was unfussy. He stocked his kitchen with fresh fruit and vegetables and essentials such as eggs, milk and mineral water. While for Salvador Dalí, his contemporary, food encouraged flights of fancy—evident in “Les Diners de Gala” (1973), a surrealist cookbook, republished in 2016 by Taschen—Picasso preferred simple, classic dishes.  Should this whet the appetite, readers can learn about the eating habits of other prominent figures. Olafur Eliasson released a book of more than 100 vegetarian recipes which “have served as nourishment and source of creative inspiration and communal discussion every day for his staff, artists, and guest collaborators”. For “Dinner with Georgia O'Keeffe”, Robin Lea collected 50 of the painter’s favourite dishes, many of which have a New Mexican flavour. In April Gucci and Dashwood Books published “Artists Eating” as part of a three-book collection of Paige Powell’s photographs. It shows Andy Warhol and Keith Haring drinking coffee at The Odeon, a bistro in Tribeca, and Jean-Michel Basquiat posing with enormous bowls of ice cream at Serendipity 3, a diner on Manhattan’s Upper East Side. It is not a new genre. In 1961 “The Artists’ and Writers’ Cookbook” collected stories and recipes from the likes of Marcel Duchamp, Man Ray and Harper Lee; an updated version, released in 2016, solicited contributions from Marina Abramović, Joyce Carol Oates and Ed Ruscha among others. Contributions range from the whimsical to the practical. Ray and Ms Abramović suggest ingredients of wooden blocks and meteorites, respectively, while both Mr Ruscha and Ms Oates offer a recipe for omelettes. Yet food, the contributors made clear, was a tool for self-expression. It was something to be played with. Such publications appeal to readers’ interest in auteurs, drawing a line between an artist’s everyday life and their work. For Picasso, for example, the presence of certain foodstuffs in his paintings was a reflection of life in Paris under German occupation; he imagined into existence items he could no longer get hold of. “Who would have dared to throw bread into a stream? Nothing was more precious to us,” he said. “A glass of wine was desirable and therefore it was translated into painting.” O’Keeffe’s modern food choices—she mostly followed a plant-based diet, ground her own wheat for bread, made her own yoghurt and drank smoothies—seems in keeping with her unique yet natural abstract style. Sometimes learning about what an artist ate humanises them, or else it adds to the romanticism and mythology of their lives. As Mason Currey writes in “Daily Rituals: How Artists Work” (2013), despite the frequent mention of decadent meals in his memoirs—and the importance of the smell of freshly baked madeleines in “In Search of Lost Time”—Marcel Proust subsisted on a breakfast of black coffee, boiled milk and two croissants in his later years. Ingmar Bergman’s daily lunch of whipped sour milk, strawberry jam and corn flakes was surprisingly jejune. These habitual, uninspiring meals seem unlikely fuel for creative work. Underpinning this genre of books is the fact that food and art are both shared experiences, shaped by wider cultural histories. The effect of a delicious meal is in many ways the same as a viewing an exquisite painting: it creates an appetite for more.