IN THREE SHORT messages sent as Kabul slept, President Donald Trump has upended more than a year of painstaking American negotiation with the insurgents of the Taliban, who have been fighting to overthrow the American-backed government in Afghanistan for 18 years. Mr Trump revealed that senior Taliban leaders had been due to meet him on Sunday at Camp David, the president’s country estate. But that had been arranged before a Taliban suicide-bomb attack in Kabul on September 5th that killed an American soldier along with 11 others. “I immediately cancelled the meeting and called off peace negotiations,” Mr Trump tweeted. “What kind of people would kill so many in order to seemingly strengthen their bargaining position?” He carried on: “If they cannot agree to a ceasefire during these very important peace talks, and would even kill 12 innocent people, then they probably don’t have the power to negotiate a meaningful agreement anyway.”  As the world digested Mr Trump’s tweets, it was unclear which was more surprising: the image of him inviting the Taliban to a cosy meeting at the presidential country retreat just a few days before the anniversary of the 9/11 attacks, the event that led to America’s military entanglement in Afghanistan; or his apparent abrupt abandonment of talks with the Taliban after nine agonising rounds. Mr Trump’s reversal came less than a week after his senior negotiator, Zalmay Khalilzad, had announced that a deal had been reached in principle to begin winding up America’s longest war. Mr Khalilzad said the accord with the Taliban would see 5,400 of America’s 14,000 troops leave in the next four-and-a-half months. A fuller withdrawal was expected over the following year or more. Yet Mr Khalilzad was vague about what the Taliban would give in return. There seems to have been a promise not to harbour foreign militants such as al-Qaeda—although little detail on how this undertaking would be enforced. There was no promise of a ceasefire. Instead, there seemed to be talk of reducing violence around American bases. Afghan forces, which already bear the brunt of the conflict, do not seem to have been offered any reprieve. As the week wore on, opinion against Mr Khalilzad’s deal appeared to harden. Indiscriminate bombings in Kabul killed dozens of civilians. Nine senior former American envoys to Afghanistan gave warning that a hasty withdrawal would result only in civil war. The Afghan government, led by Ashraf Ghani, said it had concerns. Was it anger at the American soldier’s death or cold feet about the deal that caused Mr Trump’s reversal? Or was it an attempt to wheedle more concessions out of the Taliban? If the latter, it may backfire. The Taliban have never trusted American promises; his volte-face will only deepen that mistrust. The group responded by saying that Mr Trump’s change of heart would “lead to more losses to the US”. Meanwhile Mr Ghani, sidelined by talks until now, is no doubt relieved. The Taliban had wanted him to call off presidential elections at the end of the month, which he is hoping to win. Military sources predict a bloody few days as the Taliban and America both try to show that they are undaunted by the breaking-off of negotiations. But when the furore over Mr Trump’s tweets subsides, the military realities for America remain unchanged. The Taliban are gaining ground and the Americans cannot win. The Afghan army is suffering unsustainable losses; the Americans are growing weary. In his tweets the American president asked, “How many more decades are they willing to fight?” The answer is increasingly plain: longer than Mr Trump. That suggests that, sooner or later, the talks will resume.