IN 2018, as America prepared to hold mid-term congressional elections, Republicans were running for the exits. A total of 37 GOP Congress members—34 in the House of Representatives and three in the Senate—stepped down from their posts in the months leading up to election day. Democrats went on to pick up 40 seats in the House. With just over a year until the 2020 presidential contest, Republicans are once again throwing in the towel. This month Paul Cook of California became the 16th House Republican lawmaker to announce he would not be seeking another term; just four Democrats have done the same. Pundits reckon it is a sign Republicans are pessimistic about next year’s elections. But the data suggest congressional retirements do not always lead to losses at the ballot box. An analysis of eight decades-worth of data by The Economist suggests the impact of retirements on parties’ fortunes depends on whether the president is on the ticket. In mid-term-election years (those in which only members of Congress stand for office) a party can expect losses if more of its House members retire than do from the opposing party—a loss of three House seats for each additional retirement in the typical year. In presidential election years, however, this relationship disappears (see chart). In 1992, for example, when 41 Democrats and 24 Republican House members retired from office, giving Republicans a 17-seat advantage, the GOP picked up only nine extra congressional districts. In the 1938 mid-terms, by contrast, Republicans went into election day with a similar advantage and netted 81 new seats.  Republican retirements from Congress may be a poor indicator of the party’s fate in next year’s elections. But they may yet provide clues about where the party is vulnerable in 2020. Five of the 16 retiring GOP House members won their seats in the 2018 mid-term elections by less than five percentage points. None of the four House Democrats retiring next year won in 2018 by such a slim margin. Retirements in the aggregate may be a poor predictor of election outcomes. But incumbency has been shown to bestow a four- to five-percentage-point advantage on a candidate. So every seat relinquished in a competitive district shifts the odds in favour of the challenging party. On this measure, Republicans are rapidly losing ground.