FOR THOSE who like to do their shopping in peace, any branch of Muji or Uniqlo in Seoul, South Korea’s capital, was a good choice this summer. Usually bustling with shoppers, these stores have been all but deserted for weeks as South Koreans, angry at Japan for imposing export restrictions on their country in July, have boycotted Japanese products and bought their clothes and home wares elsewhere instead. Meanwhile in Japan, there has been a revival of old tropes about “untrustworthy” Koreans. Exasperation with their neighbours’ perceived inability to put the past behind them is spreading from diplomats to ordinary Japanese. Yet the two East Asian countries are both liberal democracies and firm regional allies of America. Why can't they get along? The spat has been brewing since last October, when South Korea’s supreme court ruled that Japanese companies that used Koreans as forced labourers during the second world war were obliged to pay compensation to individual victims who were suing them. Japan, which has long maintained that all such claims had been settled by a treaty struck in 1965, demanded that the South Korean government rein in the court. South Korea declined, saying it could not interfere with the judiciary. After South Korean lawyers moved to seize assets of the firms affected by the ruling, Japan imposed export restrictions in July on chemicals needed by manufacturers of memory chips, South Korea’s most important industry. In August South Korea decided to withdraw from a bilateral intelligence-sharing pact with Japan, further escalating the conflict.  The tussle is about more than a single court ruling. South Korea and Japan have argued over the past for decades. Japan occupied and colonised Korea from 1910 until 1945, and has never fully acknowledged or properly atoned for the atrocities it committed during that time. South Korean governments, in turn, have on occasion exploited the resentment to stir up nationalist sentiment. The debate over compensation for Koreans who were forced to work in Japanese factories, or forced to serve as sex slaves in brothels for Japanese soldiers, has proved particularly acrimonious. The two allies have mostly been able to keep these disagreements separate from matters of commerce and national security. That is partly because America, which is allied with both and relies on their co-operation to manage threats in the region, most notably from North Korea, has tended to step in when such disputes have threatened to get out of hand. But under President Donald Trump, America has become increasingly disengaged from its international commitments. Mr Trump’s relationship with Kim Jong Un, North Korea’s dictator, whom he has met three times since June last year, has led him to downplay the risk of the North’s nuclear and missile programmes. He has complained about the expense of keeping American troops in the region, and has been reluctant to get involved in the argument between his two allies. Moreover, with nationalist posturing enjoying widespread support in both Japan and South Korea, neither side has a reason to back down in the short term. For now, the past will continue to trouble the present.