LAST SEPTEMBER Americans watched transfixed as Christine Blasey Ford, an academic psychologist, told a televised hearing of the Senate Judiciary Committee that Brett Kavanaugh, Donald Trump’s latest nominee to the Supreme Court bench, had sexually assaulted her 36 years earlier. Her account seemed troublingly plausible—and the judge’s response intemperate and highly partisan. Justice Kavanaugh rejected his accuser’s tearful claims as a “political hit”, “revenge on behalf of the Clintons” and the result of “millions of dollars in money from outside left-wing opposition jobs”. His Republican supporters duly confirmed his elevation to the court. Democrats and women’s rights groups were incensed. The row has now been reinvigorated by another allegation against the justice, dating back to his student days. On September 14th the New York Times published an article adapted from a book by two of its journalists which described a recollection by Max Stier, a contemporary of Justice Kavanaugh’s at Yale. Mr Stier, the book said, recalled seeing the future justice with his trousers down at a party, and friends pushing his penis into a young woman’s hand.  It turned out that the New York Times had omitted an important detail, which it later added. The book states that the woman concerned had “refused to discuss the incident, though several of her friends said she does not recall it”. Several Democratic presidential candidthrates nonetheless called for Justice Kavanaugh to be impeached—including Kamala Harris, whose fierce interrogation of the judge during his confirmation hearing helped raised her profile at that time. “I sat through those hearings,” she tweeted. “Brett Kavanaugh lied to the US Senate and most importantly to the American people.” Elizabeth Warren and Beto O’Rourke also said Justice Kavanaugh should be impeached. Justice Kavanaugh is most unlikely to be removed. Impeachment requires the assent of two-thirds of senators and the Senate is controlled by the Republicans. And the Democratic leadership doesn’t have the stomach for that fight. On September 16th Jerrold Nadler, the Democratic chairman of the House Judiciary Committee, suggested his panel was too busy considering impeachment proceedings against Mr Trump to give time to an investigation of Justice Kavanaugh. On the basis of this latest allegation, that is understandable. The allegation appears to be more sketchily sourced than those dismissed during the justice’s confirmation hearing. Other Democratic candidates, including Joe Biden, the former vice-president, and Amy Klobuchar, a senator from Minnesota, focused instead on the limited nature of the FBI’s investigation into Ms Blasey Ford’s allegation and another claim against the judge. This may be a more promising line of attack. The investigation into Ms Blasey Ford’s allegation and one made by Deborah Ramirez—another Yale contemporary of Justice Kavanaugh’s, who claimed he had exposed himself to her at a party—took only a week to complete. Neither Ms Blasey Ford nor Justice Kavanaugh, who denied both allegations, were interviewed by the investigators. The new book also claims that not one of around two dozen people who Ms Ramirez had said could support her account were interviewed. Ms Klobuchar called the probe a “sham”; Mr Biden called for an investigation into whether Republicans “pressured the FBI to ignore evidence”. That is unlikely to happen. But the new claims about Justice Kavanaugh may still have political consequences. Though Mr Trump delighted in the New York Times’s blunder—“I call for the Resignation of everybody at The New York Times involved in the Kavanaugh SMEAR story,” he tweeted—the president is polling abysmally with women. This latest reminder of his party’s tin-ear to a high-profile sexual harassment allegation is unlikely to help. It could also hurt Republicans in next year’s congressional races. The controversy over Justice Kavanaugh’s elevation is thought to have helped persuade many women to turn out for the Democrats in suburban House seats in last year’s mid-term elections. And next year Senator Susan Collins of Maine, who came under huge pressure last year to vote against Justice Kavanaugh but instead denounced his accusers, is up for re-election. Her challenger, Sara Gideon, the Democratic speaker of Maine’s house, was quick to pounce on the latest allegations. “At the time of his confirmation, there was plenty of evidence that put into question Brett Kavanaugh’s fitness for the Supreme Court,” Ms Gideon tweeted on September 17th. “Senator Collins cast a critical vote to confirm him anyway, and she said she doesn’t regret it.” Ms Gideon is unlikely to drop that line of attack.