THE SECOND round of Tunisia’s presidential election looks to be a choice between a jailed businessman facing charges of tax-dodging and a man few voters had heard of before this year. On Sunday Tunisians went to the polls to choose from 24 candidates for the top job. The election, their second since the revolution that toppled a long-lasting dictatorship in 2011, was brought forward after the death in July of the president, Beji Caid Essebsi. It could take another day to tally the results. Exit polls, though, suggest that two political outsiders will advance to the run-off later this year. Kais Saied, a law professor with a robotic demeanour and reactionary social views, was predicted to win 20% of the vote, according to exit polls by a local firm, Sigma Conseil. His opponent, Nabil Karoui, a wealthy businessman who ran a populist campaign aimed at the poor, polled at 16%.  The two have already claimed victory. Opponents say they will wait for the final count, but early results give them little reason for hope. With 52% of the vote officially counted on the afternoon of September 16th, only one other candidate, Abdelfattah Mourou of the Islamist party Ennahda, was polling in double digits. The prime minister, Youssef Chahed, won just 7%. Moncef Marzouki, an activist who led the country after the revolution, had a mere 3%. Liberal Tunisians, looking for humour in the situation, have dubbed the run-off a race between the Godfather and the Terminator. Mr Karoui’s appeal is easy to understand. Many Tunisians are unhappy with the weak economy. The dinar has lost half its value since the revolution. GDP growth is sluggish, though it did rise to 2.6% last year, while the unemployment rate is stubbornly high at 15%. Terrorist attacks have hurt tourism. An IMF-backed reform programme that aims to cut the budget deficit has brought higher taxes and unpopular efforts to freeze public-sector wages. Mr Karoui made popular promises to invest in education, clean water and other basic services for the poor. The criminal charges against him—he is accused of money-laundering and tax evasion—only added to his reputation as an outsider loathed by the establishment. (Mr Karoui denies the charges and calls them politically motivated, and under Tunisian law, he is free to stand as a candidate until convicted.) It is harder to explain Mr Saied’s surge. He is prone to delivering wooden speeches in formal Arabic. He lacks a political party. But he turned these qualities to his advantage and ran as a sort of angry, ascetic monk. He took public transport to spartan campaign events, where he made no grand promises. Instead he promised to fix the flaws in Tunisia’s young democracy: Mr Saied would do away with parliamentary elections, instead allowing elected local officials to appoint MPs, and believes voters should be free to recall poor representatives. The outcome looks like a rejection of the status quo, although the outsiders seem to have won barely one-third of the vote. Added together, “establishment” candidates carried a larger share of the electorate. There were too many of them, though, with too little to differentiate them. Perhaps the bigger emotion was apathy. Turnout was a meagre 45%, down by 18 percentage points from the last presidential election. Just one voter in six, in other words, chose Mr Karoui or Mr Saied. Most stayed at home. Tunisian politics were once defined by a competition between secularists and Islamists. That schism has faded. Even the Islamist candidate, Mr Mourou, took pains to distance himself from his own party. Instead it seems to have gone the way of democracies the world over, with populists and radicals offering themselves as an alternative to an unpopular elite. A choice between the two will probably split the country along class lines, as the poor back Mr Karoui and wealthier, educated Tunisians opt for Mr Saied. Whether either man can restore faith in Tunisia’s democracy is another matter.