The world’s second-largest nation held its breath. Scores of engineers at mission control in Bangalore had done all they could to get their country’s second Moon mission into place above the lunar surface. The final part, the descent of the landing module onto the Moon itself, was self-guided—the craft had to find its own path down. “Fifteen terrifying minutes” was how Kailasavavidoo Sivan, boss of the Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO), had described this phase of the landing sequence. His fears were well-founded. About 30 minutes before the expected landing time at 1.54am Indian time on September 7th, ISRO lost communication with the module. India had been aiming to become only the fourth member of the lunar club, after the Soviet Union, America and China. This mission, Chandrayaan-2 (Sanskrit for “Moon craft”), departed Earth on July 22nd from Satish Dhawan Space Centre in southern India, after several delays. The initial cost of $59m had climbed to $136m, in part because Russia, which had originally agreed to build the lander, pulled out. India decided to go it alone. Chandrayaan-2 is comprised of an orbiter, a lander and a rover, the latter two of which split off from the orbiter on Monday and made for the lunar surface.  The orbiter, at least, has enough fuel to stay in orbit around the Moon for at least a year, and carries eight instruments that will map the lunar surface in 3D, use lasers and radar to search for water and other minerals, and study the Moon’s sparse atmosphere (called the exosphere). But the rover (called Pragyan, Sanskrit for “wisdom”) was (is) supposed to be the main attraction, equipped as it is to test for the presence of water on the Moon. This mission’s predecessor, Chandrayaan-1, carried the NASA instrument that discovered ice at the lunar poles, and confirmed the presence of hydrated minerals. That was the main scientific rationale behind Chandrayaan-2’s mission. Chandrayaan-1, ominously, ended prematurely after a problem with the power converters meant the orbiter conked out after ten months of a planned two year jaunt around the Moon. What went wrong with the landing module is anybody’s guess—such is the nature of a communications breakdown. All was well until the final 30km powered descent to the surface, Dr Sivan’s hellish quarter hour. The module was supposed to land at a nondescript site between two craters close to the lunar south pole. Further south, in fact, than any previous moon landing. Several braking stages went off without a hitch, but then 1.24am passed without further news. After half an hour of mounting tension, Dr Sivan appeared before the cameras to give a short statement. “Normal performance was observed up to an altitude of 2.1km...Subsequently, communications from the lander to ground station was lost. The data is being analysed.” There was little in that to abate a nation gnawing its fingernails, but India Today, an English-language television station, was anxious to put a brave face on. Its presenters repeated how most of the mission had been “picture perfect”, and it was only “the last couple of per cent” that had failed to come off. Prime Minister Narendra Modi, who was at the control centre in Bangalore, slapped Dr Sivan’s back in sympathy—“the sign of a great general” gushed India Today’s presenters—and chatted with schoolchildren on his way out. None of this masked the palpable sense of deflation emanating from the scenes. All is not lost. Gremlins pose as great a threat to spacecraft as they do to smartphones and parking meters. For all anyone knows, the lander touched down safely on the target area and is sitting in standby mode, awaiting instruction from ground control. As with a missing person, one feels that the first hours and days are crucial. The lander was named Vikram, Sanskrit for ‘valour’, and Modi called for “courage” in his parting words to the ISRO scientists. But all the guts in India will not re-establish contact with a robot 239,000 miles away, and get Chandrayaan-2 back on course. India’s Moon mission needs a miracle.