IF BORIS JOHNSON thought his nightmarish week was over, on Saturday night he was proved mistaken. The previous few days had seen the prime minister lose his majority in Parliament, control of his Brexit strategy, and even the support of his own brother, Jo, who resigned as a junior minister and Tory MP. Yet late on Saturday Mr Johnson suffered a new setback: the first resignation from his cabinet. Amber Rudd, the work and pensions secretary, quit both the cabinet and the Conservative Party. The fear in Downing Street must be that she will not be the last. Ms Rudd resigned with no notice, and in devastating style. Her letter described the prime minister’s purge this week of 21 moderate Tories who had voted against the government as “an assault on decency and democracy”. More damaging still was her criticism of his Brexit policy. Mr Johnson claims that he wants to get a new and improved exit deal from the European Union, and that Britain will leave with no deal only if that approach fails. Yet Ms Rudd seems to have reached the conclusion that the government’s negotiations are insincere, and that no-deal is where it is really heading. “I no longer believe leaving with a deal is the government's main objective,” she writes. She is quitting not just the cabinet but the party, which she complains has been stripped of broad-minded MPs.  All eyes will now be on other moderate members of the cabinet. Most have said in the past that they want to get a Brexit deal and that leaving with no-deal should be only a last resort. They will have seen the same evidence as Ms Rudd in cabinet, and have read the same recent reports that Mr Johnson’s chief adviser Dominic Cummings privately admits the government’s negotiations in Brussels are “sham”. Most of them have also previously strongly condemned the idea of suspending Parliament in order to stop MPs debating Brexit, only to see Mr Johnson do just that this week. Will they continue to stand by? For Mr Johnson, more pain lies ahead. On Monday a bill forcing him to request an extension of the Brexit negotiating period, beyond the October 31st deadline, is expected to become law. The government is desperate to call an election ahead of this date, to give it the chance to overturn the legislation. Yet on Monday it is expected to lose a vote required for such an election to take place. Labour and other opposition parties say they want an election only after the Brexit deadline has been extended. They hope to humiliate Mr Johnson by forcing him to beg the EU for more time, something he has repeatedly vowed never to do. The prime minister is reportedly toying with ignoring the extension bill, thus defying the law. Tories comfort themselves with the fact that, in spite of their shocking week, they remain well ahead in the polls. Surveys out this weekend have the Conservatives some ten points in front of Labour, whose far-left leader, Jeremy Corbyn, is much less liked than Mr Johnson. The prime minister seems to be in campaign mode, expecting an election soon, even if he has to wait longer for one than he might like. His supporters insist that this week’s run of dreadful stories are of interest only to those in the Westminster bubble, and that ordinary voters couldn’t care less whether the likes of Ms Rudd are in the cabinet or not. They may well be right, for now. But as Mr Johnson continues to bleed support among his backbenchers, his cabinet and even his family, the question must be how long he can keep the support of the public.