In this year’s essay competition The Economist received nearly 2,400 entries from 130 countries and territories. They came from entrants as young as nine and as old as 71—who said they felt compelled to add their voice, even though the rules specified that only those aged 16 to 25 were eligible to win. The essays advocated everything from eco-authoritarianism to anarchy to artificial intelligence. Common themes included treating climate change as a new “world war” and replacing subsidies that contribute to pollution with ones that mitigate it. A “green index” to track the extent of the problem was put forward, as was the idea of a “green GDP” to price the value of the environment in national accounts.  Many writers pressed for abolishing capitalism, while others argued that the free market would solve the problem. A number of essays called for local governments to set environmental standards, as well as to elevate the voting power of vulnerable countries in international forums. A popular reform was “eco-conscription”, that is, a youth national service to combat climate change. Among the shortest essays we received was one from a Chicagoan, 24, who simply wrote: “Eat the rich.” More on that below. Information on the competition and finalists is here. The winning essay is here. A handful of gently-edited excerpts from the essays is hereunder. * * * Change our mentality Nargiz Ahmadova, 22, Baku, Azerbaijan “By saying to his grandchildren, ‘this river passing our house was too wide to swim in my childhood, but now it is too small to swim’, my grandfather indeed touched the point that today scientists are talking about. If even a man who has never been educated, and who has been living in the far corner of the world, far away from the media, is aware of climate change, then why the world does not give enough attention to this issue? I can not blame anyone for the climate change but only myself. I need to change my mindset so that it does not solely focus on my self-interest, but also the interests of all.” Mohammad Shaheer Qateh, 25, Kabul, Afghanistan “This is a cancer that is seizing humans’ and the Earth’s wellbeing. To easily understand it, let's use a simple example. Daily, we are advised that smoking cigarettes causes lung cancer. To decrease the chances of cancer, doctors say that one should quit or decrease smoking. But we still smoke. We can't stop it. Why? The answer is addiction. In the same way, we are addicted to extracting and using resources to produce things and feel satisfied with having a large number of products. They are not improving us. We say that we are more intelligent than our ancestors. But our ancestors’ minds were tied to wisdom, not things.” Daniel Alcock, 23, Sunderland, Britain “Perhaps the answer to our future is found in our past. With a bit of irony, the answer can be excavated from an old coal-mining community. Childhood in the northeast of England is polluted with anecdotes from the elderly as to how things ‘used to be’. Community was at the heart of everything. Whereas a Church-goer would have attended three times a week, now three times a month will suffice for the title of ‘regular’. Shared garden allotments and community meals are replaced with soup kitchens and food-banks. As for family, in some areas a teenager is more likely to own a smartphone than have a father living at home. To respond to climate change, take a step back from modernity and call back community.” The public sector Aarav Leekha, 12, New York, United States “Even though the majority of people in the United States believe climate change is real, conservative parties around the world are giving voice to climate deniers. They take advantage of a disenfranchised electorate to push denialist talking points—ill-informed at best and ridiculously untrue at worst. Convincing disenfranchised voters of the benefits of climate-change solutions is required to unify the entire electorate behind climate action. The transition from a carbon economy to a green economy, in the long run, will economically boost the disenfranchised. A World Climate Accord is needed.” Awor Deng, 23, Juba, South Sudan “While the inventions and ingenuity of man have given him a giant leap beyond the moon, it is the harm he has caused his original home that will define his fate. Mother nature has become the inevitable victim of humanity’s quest for progress. The menace is caused partly by a tendency of nations to sacrifice the environment at the earlier stages of their economic development, creating the notion that economic progress and environmental protection are mutually exclusive. The menace of plastic waste is a ‘thorn in the flesh’ for humanity and the ecosystem. We must redirect our capital to clean up our polymeric mess. Mankind must rethink the use of capital; we must give it a new purpose, one that will ultimately enable us to save and make peace with our planet.” The private sector Johannes Stupperich, 19, German in Nancy, France “GDP is not functional for measuring the sustainability of an economy, which is why a “climate chit” should be introduced, whose negative equivalent is 1 tonne of CO2, making it desirable to have a GGDP (or “Green Gross Domestic Product”) equalling or being superior to 0, because that would indicate that the harm done to the environment equals or is inferior to the measures in favour of the environment. Climate chits could be traded on exchanges against currencies. Companies with a positive GGDP can trade their climate chits to make further (and hopefully further green) investments, while companies with a negative balance must pay a fine.” Eduardo Magalhães, 22, Albergaria-a-Velha, Portugal “The ‘polluter pays’ principle is dramatically outdated. In some cases the damage done can have irreparable costs to nature and wildlife. In other situations the damage looks affordable by the polluter, especially if the cost is associated with policies like taxes or subsidies. A possible solution is to turn the principle to a sort of ‘polluter rebuilds’ principle, in which damage can only be rectified by a large investment to recover what was lost and to expand the injured area (for example, if it was a forest, to reforest more).” More excerpts from the essays will be added soon. As for the three-word essay we received, it came with a title that was eight times longer: “The Anti-Disparity Cookbook: An Evidence Based Policy Recipe to Ending World Hunger While Dismantling the Impending Socioeconomic and Ecological Threat Posed by Climate Change.” Thanks to all the people who submitted an essay.