Editor’s note: This article has been updated since it was published on September 27th AFGHAN ELECTIONS are never easy, but Saturday’s presidential poll had conjured up even more foreboding than usual. The country of 35m voted to choose a leader for the fourth time since the Taliban regime was toppled in 2001. The contest is a re-run of the one in 2014. The incumbent, Ashraf Ghani, is the favourite; his closest rival is likely to be the man he defeated five years ago, Abdullah Abdullah. There were 13 other candidates, including Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, a blood-stained former warlord. Campaigning had been half-hearted. Until Donald Trump killed off talks with the Taliban insurgents in early September, many had expected the election to be deemed a distraction and postponed.  Afghanistan’s rugged terrain, widespread poverty and atrocious roads would make it hard to conduct an election smoothly even in peacetime. But last year was the deadliest for Afghan civilians since the Americans overthrew the Taliban in 2001, as the government in Kabul and its international backers continue their long fight against the Taliban and other groups. American officials last year estimated that the Afghan government wholly or mainly controls only a little over half the country’s districts. The government said almost a third of polling stations would not operate at all, largely because of insecurity. On the day, officials said they had lost lost contact with about 900 of the nearly 5,000 voting centres that were due to operate. The Taliban declared the vote illegitimate and told Afghans to stay at home. Violence on the day was not as bad as many had feared. Still, at least 23 were reported injured and at first glance turnout appeared low. Previous elections have been mired in fraud, with insecurity hampering scrutiny and favouring cheating. The election commission introduced new electronic-voting machines that are supposed to reduce the risk of skulduggery. But the first time they were used, during parliamentary elections last year, they caused long delays; the problems seemed to reappear. Opposition politicians had begun to express doubts about the integrity of the election even before a single vote had been cast. Mr Ghani insisted an election would strengthen the state and deliver a mandate to talk to the Taliban. Afghanistan’s international backers agreed, at least publicly, and stumped up millions to pay for it. But if the result is strongly disputed, it might make matters worse. The opposition is worried not simply about outright ballot-rigging, but also about insecurity that might curtail voting in places that are thought to favour its candidates. Some of those candidates, in turn, control militias. Mr Hekmatyar, for example, has warned menacingly of spiralling violence if the vote is not free and fair. The biggest rift is likely to be between Mr Ghani and Dr Abdullah. The latter claimed he lost in 2014 only because of cheating. America managed to stave off a crisis by arranging a deal in which Dr Abdullah took on the hastily invented job of “chief executive” while Mr Ghani became president in what was billed as a unity government. The government brought little unity though, says Michael Kugelman of the Wilson Centre, a think-tank in America, and Dr Abdullah feels he has an account to settle since he believes he defeated Mr Ghani in 2014. “So he certainly won’t back down easily, and especially if he is declared a loser to his rival Ghani once again.” Mr Ghani, for his part, has said that he will not be part of another two-headed government. Results are not expected until at least November 7th. There will be a run-off if, as seems likely, no candidate wins more than 50% of the vote. Afghans and diplomats are holding their breath. A stand-off risks instability that the Taliban or the Islamic State group could exploit. If this election produces another deadlock, will Mr Trump, who has never concealed his eagerness to get America out of Afghanistan, be prepared to get involved enough in Afghan politics to resolve it?