OIL PRICES leapt when markets opened on September 16th, following a drone attack on the Abqaiq oil-processing plant and the Khurais oilfield in Saudi Arabia on September 14th. At one point prices were as much as 20% higher—the biggest intraday jump since Iraq invaded Kuwait almost 30 years ago. At 7pm London time Brent, the leading international benchmark, was 14.7% up, at $69.09 per barrel. Prices have been remarkably choppy this year: driven up as American sanctions on Iranian and Venezuelan oil have threatened to restrict supply; and down by signs that the world economy is slowing down, dampening demand. Saudi Arabia, by far the biggest producer in the Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), has tried to stabilise prices, with limited success. In December 2018 OPEC and others, notably Russia, said they would cut production by 1.2m barrels a day. During the year the Saudis have reduced their own output by more than they promised as other OPEC countries have kept pumping. Yet prices have remained volatile, and even now Brent is 8% below its peak for the year (see chart). The rise of shale oil in America—now the world’s biggest oil producer—has made it even harder for OPEC to control global oil prices.  The main questions for oil markets are whether a wider military conflict ensues, thereby threatening even more of the Gulf’s output, and how fast Saudi Arabia can resume production. On September 15th Aramco promised a progress update in “about 48 hours”. Saudi Arabia could replace some of its lost oil from its stocks. But analysts at Rystad Energy, a research firm, warn that could be harder than officials suggest, as stocks are at their lowest in ten years. Other OPEC countries and Russia said on September 16th that they would not immediately pump extra oil to fill the gap. The attacks call into question plans by Saudi Aramco, Saudi Arabia’s state-owned oil company, to launch what is expected to be the biggest stockmarket listing in history. Last month, during Aramco’s first-ever earnings call with investors, Khalid Al-Dabbagh, the chief financial officer, declared the company’s goal to be “to maintain our position as a world-leading crude-oil producer and lowest-cost producer while providing reliable crude oil supply.” That reliability was already in question. Five days after the call, Houthi rebels claimed responsibility for a drone attack on the company’s Shaybah oil field, which produces 1m barrels of oil a day. The attacks on Abqaiq and Khurais has now laid bare the extent of Aramco’s vulnerability.