THERE IS A reason so much music by Bostonian bands features in “City on a Hill”, a new crime series. “It’s more than a show that takes place in Boston,” Chris Tergesen, the music supervisor, says. “It’s about what was happening to the city, so it helps to keep it localised.” The selection “wouldn’t be so important if the show just happened to be set in Boston.” “City on a Hill”—a story of cops, robbers, lawyers, activists and aspiring politicians in Boston in the early 1990s—is the latest blue-chip American drama to reach British screens. Kevin Bacon stars as a veteran FBI officer; Matt Damon, Ben Affleck and Barry Levinson are among the producers. But while much of its plotting will be familiar, its use of music, chosen by Mr Tergesen in concert with the producers, is unusual. Not all the music is native to the city, but the authentic stuff dominates the soundtrack, with Boston (a band), Marky Mark and the Funky Bunch, and several appearances from Pixies, Morphine and the Del Fuegos. (Some of these choices were practical as well as artistic. “We decided to look for indie bands who wouldn’t be as expensive as Aerosmith or the Cars,” Mr Tegersen says.)  While other shows have used local music before, it has tended to be when musicians are central to the series (as in “Treme”, set in New Orleans after Hurricane Katrina), or for particular reasons of verisimilitude (as in “The Wire”, which from its fourth season had its drug dealers listening to Baltimore rappers). Mr Tergesen, who has been a music supervisor since 1993, cannot think of another show which has used artists relevant to the location not incidentally but as part of the storytelling fabric. “Usually soundtracking is an age-appropriate thing,” he says. “So if it’s a young-adult show, you’d get in very poppy music.” For “City on a Hill” his primary consideration was the characters and what they might listen to. Soundtrack music comes in two forms: diegetic or “source” (ie, music that is part of the setting—playing on the radio, or from a jukebox); and non-diegetic (that which is heard only by the viewer). Much of the Bostonian music in “City on a Hill” is non-diegetic, featuring in montage sequences at the end of episodes. When it intrudes in this way, Mr Tergesen says, it has to serve the characters. When Jimmy Ryan, a criminal played by Mark O’Brien, listens to rap, he listens to Marky Mark and the Funky Bunch. “Those characters are so racist, I don’t know if they’d be listening to straight-up hip-hop,” Mr Tegersen says. Perhaps Ryan would have been more of a Mighty Mighty Bosstones man? “They were the first band I thought of when I saw the show coming down the pike, and I had a slot for them, but creatively the producers wanted something else. They’ll probably be in the next season.” Unless the viewer knows the groups already, they are unlikely to even notice that the music gives preference to local bands. For instance, “I Still Want You” by the Del Fuegos peaked at #87 in the American charts and did not reach the British charts at all. “For source music, you don’t want something that will pull you away from the dialogue.” Something awful would be distracting, as would something too famous. “You don’t want to put crap in there, but you don’t want: ‘I haven’t heard that in years!’” Mr Tergersen says. “So I’m not sure Mr and Mrs Joe Public were saying: ‘Oh my God, that’s the Del Fuegos!’ But I don’t mind if someone in the know goes: ‘I see what you’re doing there.’” Nevertheless, for the tuned-in viewer, this local music adds an extra layer of depth, and a delicious thrill of recognition, without ever distracting the less knowledgeable from the central premise. And, as Mr Tergesen intended, it makes Boston a character in the programme. Though not as celebrated as New York or Los Angeles, Memphis or Nashville, it is a city with a rich and distinct musical history. Now, when music is globalised and anyone can hear any music from anywhere at any time, the notion of the local scene might seem less relevant than ever. But “City on a Hill” understands the importance of the music of place. “City on a Hill” was broadcast on Showtime in America. It is currently showing on Sky Atlantic in Britain