ON SEPTEMBER 16th Elizabeth Warren published a detailed plan for tackling corruption in government, one of the big themes of her campaign for the Democratic presidential nomination. Her timing could not have been better. A week later the Democrats announced they were opening an impeachment inquiry into President Donald Trump, following revelations that he had intimated to Ukraine’s government that America’s supply of aid might depend on its investigating the family of Joe Biden. Mrs Warren has since focused heavily on her loathing for sleaze and kleptocracy on the campaign trail. “Democrats and Republicans–nobody likes the corruption,” she told a cheering crowd in Keene, New Hampshire, on September 25th. “Nobody likes a government that has been bought and paid for by the rich.”  Though it carries heavy risks for the Democrats, the decision to impeach Mr Trump could play out well for Mrs Warren for two reasons. First, impeachment proceedings, which will be reported in enormous detail by the media, will amplify an issue on which she is strong. In April, Mrs Warren became the first of the front-runners for the Democratic nomination to call for Mr Trump’s impeachment. But though she has described the president as “corruption in the flesh”, her emphasis is on America’s systemic failings rather than any individual. She often describes how the country’s big problems, from rising health-care costs to climate change, are connected to the influence of rich people and corporations on policy-making. Given that the impeachment story is likely to suck media attention away from the Democratic primary her prior standing on the issue looks valuable. Mrs Warren’s anti-corruption plan included a ban on lawmakers becoming lobbyists and on lobbying on behalf of foreign governments and companies. On September 27th she announced new plans, including more funding for congressional research to weaken the power of corporate lobbyists. She said she would reinstate the Office of Technology Assessment, a bipartisan research office for scientific and technological policy that lost its funding in 1995. This focus looks good for Mrs Warren in another way—it plays to the vulnerability of her main opponent, Mr Biden, on the issue. Almost entirely unfairly, Mr Biden risks being damaged by the Ukraine scandal. In a rough transcript of a telephone conversation between Mr Trump and Volodymyr Zelensky, the president of Ukraine, published by the White House on September 25th, Mr Trump talks about a probe into Burisma, Ukraine’s biggest private oil-and-gas company, and urges Mr Zelensky to investigate Mr Biden’s son, Hunter, who was on Burisma’s board. There is no evidence that there was ever any kind of inquiry into Mr Biden junior, or that there was any need for one. But voters may be turned off by the fact that he was on the board of such a company at a time when his father was vice-president. And Mr Trump will no doubt continue trying to tie Mr Biden to allegations of corruption, which may well force him to expend energy defending himself that would be better spent on his campaign. Mrs Warren looks best-placed to gain from that. Even before the impeachment enquiry she was challenging Mr Biden for the front-runner spot; on September 25th a national poll published by Quinnipiac showed her just ahead of him for the first time. Other polls show her closing the gap and gaining with groups with which Mr Biden is strong, including blacks. Will she use Mr Biden’s weakness over the impeachment saga to attack him directly? It seems unlikely. Mrs Warren seems refreshingly disinclined to go after fellow Democrats. During the most recent debate, earlier this month, she passed up several opportunities to make Mr Biden look foolish. On September 25th she was asked if she would outlaw the kind of nepotism that probably got his son his Ukrainian gig. “No,” she reportedly said, before adding: “I don’t know. I’d have to go back at look at the details.”