PRESIDENT DONALD TRUMP is prone to changing his mind. On the 18-year-old war in Afghanistan, the commander-in-chief is particularly fickle. In August 2017, on the advice of his generals, he reluctantly agreed to increase the number of American troops deployed in the country from 8,000 to 14,000, while admitting that his “original instinct was to pull out”. In December 2018 American media reported that Mr Trump had ordered the Pentagon to withdraw half of those soldiers. The White House later denied the reports and the withdrawal was never carried out. Recently there have been signs the president would be bringing troops home. American envoys have spent months negotiating a peace deal with the Taliban in Doha. The White House even arranged a secret meeting at Camp David, the presidential retreat, to conclude the deal. But on September 7th Mr Trump abruptly cancelled the negotiations. Publicly, he cited the death of an American soldier in a Taliban suicide-bombing as the reason for his volte-face. Privately, John Bolton, his national security adviser, with whom he has frequently clashed, had firmly opposed any concessions to the jihadists. Mr Bolton may have won the argument, but on September 10th he was sacked.  Even as Mr Trump has flip-flopped, Americans’ views of the war have not wavered during his presidency. A new poll by Gallup, released on the anniversary of al-Qaeda’s attack on America on September 11th 2001, shows that 52% of American adults think that it was not a mistake to invade Afghanistan. This is a marked drop from the 93% who thought it was the right thing to do in 2002, but about the same proportion as during Barack Obama’s second term (see chart, above). Republicans have historically been more supportive of the war than Democrats, and have remained so even as Mr Trump has voiced his misgivings. Today, 70% of them maintain that George W. Bush’s decision 18 years ago was the correct one. That is in contrast with Democrats, who started to waver in 2004 and definitively turned against the war around 2011. Although most Americans still back the initial invasion, there is little enthusiasm for the war to drag on much longer. A survey in September 2018 by YouGov, a pollster, found that just 31% of Americans thought the United States should increase or maintain troop levels in Afghanistan in the next year. Trump supporters were likelier than other respondents to favour fighting on: among those who voted for Mr Trump in 2016, 39% wanted troop numbers to rise or stay the same (see chart, below). YouGov also found that Trump voters tended to oppose negotiating with the Taliban: 50% did so, compared with 35% of people who voted for Hillary Clinton. Trump voters were also more likely to favour increasing America’s armed presence around the world. The president no doubt thinks that ending a lengthy and bloody war is an achievement that he could tout during next year’s election campaign. But Republicans remain committed to maintaining America’s global military might. They, like Mr Bolton, would balk at a presidential handshake with the Taliban on American soil.