RIC OCASEK spent much of his late teens in the basement of his parents’ house in Cleveland, Ohio. First it was a darkroom for his photographs and prints. Then it was a laboratory. Mr Ocasek’s father was an analyst at NASA and he, too, was intrigued by how things fit together: he would spend hours tinkering with electronics. Later it was a studio, a place for Mr Ocasek to study chords on the piano and contemplate what made Buddy Holly’s sound so distinctive. It was in his subterranean den that he could make best use of his guitar, a gift from his grandmother, who encouraged him to sing. Later still, it was in a basement in Newton, Massachusetts, that Mr Ocasek would write the songs which made his name. Mr Ocasek twice enrolled in college but dropped out to pursue a career in music. In Columbus he met Benjamin Orr who, at 18 years old, was already a veteran of the local scene as a member of the Grasshoppers, a band which regularly played on regional television. In 1968 the duo formed a band called ID Nirvana, and they bounced around Ohio, Michigan, New York and Boston looking for their big break. Band members joined and left; they changed their name to Milkwood, and released a forgettable folk-rock album. Then they became Richard and the Rabbits, then Cap’n Swing, then—finally—the Cars in 1976.  This formation—with Greg Hawkes on the keyboard, Elliot Easton on the guitar, David Robinson on the drums, Orr on bass and vocals and Mr Ocasek on rhythm guitar and vocals—seemed to work. Mr Ocasek did most of the songwriting, with other band members providing feedback on lyrics or arrangements. They played at clubs in downtown Boston and earned a loyal local following; soon, a demo recording of “Just What I Needed”, a propulsive rock song with a warbling synth hook, was being played by radio stations in the city. A contract with Elektra Records soon followed. The Cars’ self-titled album (1978), recorded in just 12 days with the help of Roy Thomas Baker, the top producer of the day, was full of tunes suited to the airwaves. The music borrowed elements from punk and glam rock—Mr Ocasek named many of his songs after rock’s early hits—but added synthesisers, electronic sounds and the sort of catchy melodies found in classic pop. The band’s direct antecedent was Roxy Music, which had championed stylised futuristic rock, but the Cars took it further both in depth and commercial appeal. The genre which emerged needed a whole new name: New Wave. The Cars enjoyed high rankings on the Billboard chart; their debut album has sold more than 6m copies to date. “Candy-O”, another LP, followed in 1979. Mr Ocasek became celebrated for his lyrics, which showed his affection for Bob Dylan, the Carpenters and Beat poets, and he delivered the lines with a cool, enigmatic attitude. Songs such as “Let’s Go” were at once world-weary and witty; on “My Best Friend’s Girl” he toyed with the conventions of lovelorn pop by telling listeners that the object of his affections “used to be mine”. The band was not known for dynamic live performances. “I never think, ‘Wow, I can’t wait to get the crowd moving,’” Mr Ocasek once said. “Some of my favourite bands never moved an inch.” Yet they excelled at the music-video format, and the rise of MTV coincided with their fifth album, “Heartbeat City” (1984). Mr Ocasek, gangly but highly watchable, made a magnetic protagonist in the videos for “Magic” and “You Might Think” (which won the Video of the Year at the first MTV Video Music Awards). Special effects turned him into King Kong, or a fly, or showed him walking on water. His fans—and by this point there were many of them—lapped it up. But by 1988, having released five albums that had gone platinum, the Cars had puttered to a stop. Mr Ocasek and Orr had fallen out, and they barely spoke before Orr’s death from cancer in 2000. Mr Ocasek, restlessly creative, released solo albums, wrote poetry and made art. He continued working as a producer for other bands, lending his ear and arrangement skills to artists such as Bad Brains, Suicide, Guided by Voices and Weezer. He was a respected mentor of up-and-coming stars, and in 2003 returned to Elektra Records to become the head of artists and repertoire. He joked that he was terrible at the job, bringing in “every weird act [he] could think of”. In 2011 the Cars reunited to release a final album, “Move Like This”, which offered a sleek if restrained version of their sound. In 2018 the band was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame, and Mr Ocasek reflected on the spectacular success it had enjoyed. “When we started the band Ben was supposed to be the lead singer and I was supposed to be the good-looking guy,” he quipped. “But after the first gig that changed. I got demoted to just the songwriter.” Rock music is all the richer for his creations.