HOMELESSNESS IN BRITAIN has risen sharply in the past decade. The number of rough sleepers has increased by 165% since 2010; according to Shelter, a charity, 320,000 people qualify as homeless, with an additional 36 people losing permanent accommodation every day. Some cities, such as Manchester, have pledged to end rough sleeping by 2020. But many of the underlying causes—including rent hikes, cuts to welfare, lack of social housing and addiction—persist. The situation in London is dire, as anyone who has spotted the loose blankets, sleeping bags and cardboard bivouacs in the city’s arches and doorways knows. “Here for Life”, a new film, looks at the problem square-on. Co-directed by Andrea Luka Zimmerman and Adrian Jackson, it features a group of ten individuals who are encouraged to talk about themselves; the camera follows them around various unvarnished locations in the city. “More than half this group are currently housed, with more or less security,” Mr Jackson explains. Yet “all the people in the film have experienced different kinds of homelessness: squatting, sofa-surfing, temporary accommodation, street homelessness.”  Each has a chequered past; most have had run-ins with the law. Patrick witnessed his father’s death in a brawl. Mwiinga has had problems with drugs and alcohol, and it is suggested that an injury to her leg, now in a splint, was inflicted by an abusive partner. Jono, from Ireland, has had a habit of “scoring drugs before work” and is estranged from his daughter. Ben talks of struggling with paranoia and fear, demons which have become so insurmountable that maintaining work or starting a family is impossible. Each person is looking to make sense of their situation, and their stories are moving. Yet “Here for Life” takes an unusual approach to storytelling. It is less a narrative than a montage, and it sometimes blurs the line between reality and fiction. Errol, the most articulate member of this group, is shown stealing a bicycle and then being bundled into the back of a police van. This scene is engineered for the benefit of the film, though the police officers and the arrest are real: it is his own bike, and he is demonstrating to a small crowd in Brixton how a theft might be done. As a result his protests are theatrical, and he plays his situation for laughs. “His only crime here was being black in possession of a sharp wit,” Mr Jackson says: the scene is designed to illuminate the fact that the film’s cast have been the victims of abuse and “far more significant crimes”. The group is “here”, the film’s title suggests, ready for a different kind of “life”. Errol reflects solemnly on the “old and new me”, explaining his past mistakes in order to be liberated from them, after a fashion. Other members of the group are also hoping to address and work through their trauma. These stories are not made to end in resolution. Instead, the directors bring the group together in a devised play, performed in the Nomadic Community Gardens in Shoreditch. The cast congregate in this oasis of allotments and ramshackle studios in east London to participate in Cardboard Citizens, a theatre project founded in 1991 by Mr Jackson. For more than 25 years he has written new pieces in collaboration with the homeless and disenfranchised, and has also worked with them on Shakespeare and opera. The unnamed play is simple but touching, clearly drawing on the experiences of its participants. The drama’s main theme is redemption. A man gets a job working for a delivery company. The horse on which his earnings depend is stolen. This prompts him to think about theft. Mr Jackson says the viewer sees “something of the cycle of oppression to which the poor are subjected, and how it affects the man’s life and his family.” The directors hope that a wide audience will see “Here for Life” for its insights into a difficult subject. As well as screening in British cinemas in November, it will be shown in hostels and shelters and in some prisons. It ought to be shown in the corridors of power, too. The British government has claimed to be spending over £1bn on the homelessness scourge: every minister would benefit from seeing this vivid picture of hardship. “Here for Life” had its premiere at Locarno Film Festival in August. It will be released in select cinemas in Britain on November 22nd