THE SWEARING-IN this month of a government yoking the populist Five Star Movement to the centre-left Democratic Party (PD) was a big relief to investors in Italy’s volatile government debt and to others with a stake in the country’s political stability. Among other things, the new alignment promised to keep the Northern League, a Eurosceptic, nativist party led by Matteo Salvini, out of office until 2023 when the next general election is due. But on September 17th Italian politics were once more cast into commotion. Matteo Renzi, prime minister for almost three years until December 2016, announced he was leaving the PD to form a separate parliamentary caucus. That appeared to be his first step towards the foundation of a new centrist party along the lines of La République En Marche in France and Ciudadanos in Spain.  Mr Renzi called the incumbent prime minister, Giuseppe Conte, to assure him his nascent group would continue to support the government. And it was soon apparent that a majority of Mr Renzi’s followers in parliament intended to stay in the PD. Until now, he has been able to count on the loyalty of more than half the party’s 111 deputies and 51 senators. Yet only about 20 in the lower house and ten in the upper were reportedly prepared to join him. Pollsters mused that, in an election, Italia Viva (the name of the new grouping) would scrape only 3-8% of the national vote. Markets reacted relatively calmly. The usual measure of disquiet over Italy—the yield gap between its bonds and those of safe-haven Germany—increased only modestly. That, though, underestimated the danger. Until a vote is held, Mr Renzi’s electoral prospects are irrelevant. So is his promise to Mr Conte. It comes, after all, from a man who publicly pledged his loyalty to his predecessor, Enrico Letta, just before ousting him. More important is that Mr Renzi will soon have the means to strip the government of its majority. One assessment, which may also have influenced the markets, is that this will enable him to impose more moderate, business-friendly policies on the coalition. Another, more alarming one, is that Mr Renzi remains hungry for power and will dispose of the government as soon as he believes it is in his interest to do so. In an interview with Il Giornale, a daily, Mr Renzi quoted a long-standing party colleague as having told him: “If you leave the PD, the spotlight will go off you and you won’t count for anything again.” Mr Renzi commented: “We shall see.” He has rich backers, including Daniele Ferrero of the Venchi confectionery group, and a London-based hedge-fund manager, Davide Serra. He could well benefit, in terms of votes both in parliament and the country, from the gradual disintegration of Silvio Berlusconi’s centre-right party, Forza Italia. And for as long as he holds the power to make or break the government, Mr Renzi is unlikely to be far from the spotlight. He once revelled in the nickname rottamatore, “demolition man”. That was meant to reflect his energy, determination and reforming zeal. But the greatest destruction the former prime minister wreaked was on his own party, which split once before while he was in office. He may not have finished demolishing it yet.