IT BECAME ONE of the defining images of a new South Africa: Nelson Mandela, the country’s first black president, wearing the green-and-gold jersey of the national rugby team and shaking hands with the side’s victorious white captain, Francois Pienaar. Rugby in South Africa may have been viewed as the sport of the white Afrikaner elite, but the Springboks’ victory over New Zealand in the 1995 World Cup united the nation in celebration. Mandela had become president the previous year, beginning the process of repairing the damage wrought by decades of apartheid. On the pitch the divisions were clear: in that final a majority-black country cheered on a team with just one non-white player, Chester Williams. The winger, who died this month of a heart attack aged 49, may have become the face of the tournament, but he represented the struggles that non-white South African players faced. And as the Springboks begin their World Cup campaign in Japan this week, South African rugby is still grappling with the legacy of apartheid.  Mr Williams grew up in Paarl, a poor town in the Western Cape, in a rugby family. His father Wilfred played to a high level in the 1970s and in 1984 his uncle Avril was called up to the Springboks, only the second black player to join the national squad. But Chester’s journey to rugby glory was far from assured. Rugby’s popularity with British soldiers in the 19th century ingrained the idea of its being a sport for South Africa’s white minority. It was mostly played and watched by whites, in particular Afrikaners (whites of Dutch descent). After the apartheid government came to power in 1948, the Springboks became a focus for the anti-apartheid movement in South Africa and abroad. The few black team members were often accused of endorsing the racist status quo. Mr Williams felt these prejudices keenly. Early in his career he recalled having to get changed on the bus because he was excluded from changing rooms, and being left out of functions after games.   Having played for Western Province, his local team, Mr Williams made his international debut against Argentina in 1993 and went on to play 27 tests. In 1994 he was named player of the year by the South African Rugby Union (SARU). In the build-up to the World Cup he scored two tries against Western Samoa—and in doing so injured his hamstring, ruling him out of the tournament. It was only after his replacement was banned following a brawl on the pitch that Mr Williams found himself once again facing Western Samoa, this time in the quarter-final. He scored four exhilarating tries in front of a 50,000-strong crowd in Johannesburg. In an interview with The Economist in April, Mr Williams explained that he dealt with the pressure he endured as the team’s only black member by striving to play to his unique strengths. He wasn’t the fastest winger, he said, but his feel for the game allowed him to get into the right position moments before his competitors. This talent didn’t stop him from receiving abuse, not least from his World Cup team-mate, James Small, who allegedly used a racist slur and taunted Mr Williams: “Why do you want to play our game? You know you can’t play it.” It was hoped that Mr Williams’s role in 1995 might help usher in a new era for black South African rugby. The stirring final scenes of “Invictus”, a film telling the story of the tournament, might have you think so. The team embraces Mr Williams, while South Africans of all races dance onto the streets together. But it wasn’t to be. Mr Williams was dropped before the next World Cup. In 1999 the government imposed a quota for the picking of black players, and Nick Mallett, the Springboks’ coach, insisted that he did not need Mr Williams because he had already hit the target of three black players. The quota, he suggested, was the only way a black athlete would get into his side. The quota system persists today, part of an attempt to diversify the sport. But it has succeeded mainly in bringing a few black players to the very top of South African rugby without supporting new talent in the lower echelons. The national team in the last World Cup in 2015 was 74% white. At this year’s tournament, the coach, Rassie Erasmus, has been tasked with fielding a side at least half of whom are black. Now that Siya Kolisi, the first black captain in South Africa’s history, has recovered from a recent knee injury, Mr Erasmus could hit that target. But that would hide deeper problems. Teams in South Africa’s domestic leagues have been under such pressure to field black players that the best are expected to play in almost every fixture, putting them at greater risk of injury and exhaustion. Their inclusion is still seen by many as a token gesture, even when their performances leave little doubt of their skill. Makhenkesi Stofile, a former minister of sport, has admitted that South Africa missed the opportunity to introduce more black players to the sport after 1995. Initiatives such as “Operation Rugby”, intended to pour resources into disadvantaged areas and create a solid base of black players, failed due to a lack of money and resistance from clubs dominated by white South Africans, according to Ashwin Desai and Zayn Nabbi, the authors of a case study of rugby in post-apartheid South Africa. Mark Alexander, the president of SARU, has admitted that his organisation, along with the government, needs to do more to introduce rugby to poor schools in black neighbourhoods. He recently claimed that 80% of South Africa’s state-run schools do no sport at all. Mr Williams, meanwhile, acknowledged that quotas had increased black representation in top-flight rugby, but was consistently critical. In 2015 he told ESPN, “You must scrap quotas, but I still think there must be opportunities for the black players. You must give them more than one chance...not everybody can perform on their debut.” He knew what he was talking about: after he stopped playing, he went into coaching, training South Africa’s seven-a-side squad and later the University of the Western Cape. Race remains a fraught issue in South African rugby, but thanks to his role in his country’s great sporting triumph, Mr Williams will be long remembered.