AMONG THE most frequent criticisms levelled by unseasoned spectators of cricket is that it can last so long and yet fail to produce a winner. This summer’s Ashes series between old foes England and Australia saw five matches played over 23 days, with 4,956 runs scored and 181 wickets taken—and still the contest ended with a 2-2 draw. In fact, this was the first Ashes stalemate since 1972. But few of the people who watched the games could claim to have been bored. Australian fans can gloat about retaining the trophy, having won it last time. England maintained an unbeaten run in home Test series that now stretches back five years, to go with a World Cup victory in the summer. And, despite fears that the series could be an anticlimax after the remarkable World Cup final, most of the five Test matches were thrillers. Going into the Ashes, most pundits expected the contest to be tight. We noted that, according to the Elo algorithm, which measures the strength of sports teams over time, both England and Australia were unusually weak—but fortunately, to a similar degree. Both possessed several outstanding bowlers and few distinguished batsmen. “If the forthcoming matches are remembered as classics,” we predicted, “it will probably be thanks to tense, low-scoring games.”  That was certainly true. The batting average (that is, runs scored per wicket taken) in the series was barely above 27, the lowest it has been in the Ashes since last century (see chart, below). Even among the few top-class batsmen on display, good scores were hard to come by. Joe Root, England’s captain, did not pass 100 once. David Warner, Australia’s most aggressive batsman, managed just 95 runs in ten innings, the worst ever return for an opening batsman. This can partly be attributed to the superb pace bowling on both sides. CricViz, an analytics firm, has a statistical model that can predict the probability of a ball taking a wicket or being hit for runs, based on its trajectory. The company reckons that England’s “expected” batting average, based on the quality of bowling it faced, ought to have been 26 runs per wicket. Australia’s was 28. In other words, the historically low scores this summer were almost guaranteed by the thunderbolts served up by the likes of Josh Hazlewood, Pat Cummins, Jofra Archer and Stuart Broad, all of whom have career averages in the mid- or low-20s. This often unplayable bowling made the performance of the series’ best batsman even more extraordinary. While nobody else mustered an average above 55, Steve Smith’s runs for Australia came at a rate of 110 per wicket. Of the seven times that he was eventually dismissed, three came when he was selflessly trying to accelerate the scoring rate towards the end of his team’s innings. CricViz estimates that a normal batsman would have been out at least 20 times in the 1,196 deliveries that he faced. In all, Mr Smith received 12% of the total balls in the series—and he missed nearly a third of the contest with a concussion, after Mr Archer struck him on the head. At the start of the summer, English fans booed him at every opportunity. These were his first Test matches in more than a year, after serving a suspension for his role in a ball-tampering scandal. By mid-September, the only noise that greeted his brave innings was polite applause. He can now claim to have produced two of the ten best series-long performances in Ashes history (he scored his runs at an average of 137 last time around). Only Sir Donald Bradman, the biggest statistical outlier in any sport, has a better record. Throughout the summer, Mr Smith’s Bradman-esque feats and technique have made comparisons to “the Don” unavoidable. His near invincibility at the crease scuppered our other prediction before the Ashes: that thanks to a dearth of batting talent, “there are unlikely to be many remarkable [team] innings extending deep into the fourth or fifth day”. In fact, every single game lasted until at least lunch on the fourth day. Some bad weather helped extend the matches, with several overs lost to rain. And in the one game that Mr Smith missed entirely, Ben Stokes, England’s hard-hitting all-rounder, scored a miraculous 135 to rescue England from defeat. Mr Stokes single-handedly kept his side’s hopes alive during the fourth day, and scored 74 of 76 runs for the final wicket in England’s highest-ever run-chase. Without Mr Smith’s presence, a couple of matches probably would have fizzled out on the third day. But in the end, the batsmen for both teams survived nearly 10,000 deliveries between them—almost exactly the number we would expect, given the long-run average of 1,000 balls per team in Test matches. The series therefore offered not only six weeks of great entertainment, but also a reminder that old-fashioned, patient batting in Test cricket lives on.