ECONOMISTS RARELY think about the average gestation period of pigs (115 days) or the length of time a sow needs to reach sexual maturity (roughly six months). In China things are different. For anyone analysing its growth prospects, a basic knowledge of hog-breeding cycles is part of the job. Pigs are so central to the Chinese diet that the ups and downs of pork prices have had an outsized impact on inflation over the years. Once again, porcine expertise is in demand: African swine fever has devastated China’s pigs in recent months, complicating its economic outlook. New data show that pork prices soared by 23% in August from July, the highest monthly jump on record. On an annual basis they were up by 47%. The feed-through to broader inflation has been modest so far. But pork is certain to become more costly—potentially a lot more—in the coming months, putting further upward pressure on consumer prices (see chart).  In the past, whenever pork prices soared, farmers quickly responded by producing more pigs. That will be harder this time because the population of breeding sows has collapsed. The central bank has started to ease monetary policy as growth weakens, but the spectre of pork-led inflation, even if temporary, could limit its space for cutting interest rates. Officials are worried. China consumes about 55m tonnes of pork each year, as much as the rest of the world combined. Hu Chunhua, a vice-premier, said in August that the supply shortfall this year will be about 10m tonnes, more than the volume traded on international markets. So imports cannot plug the gap. The government has announced a range of incentives, from direct subsidies to low-interest loans, to encourage pig farmers to expand. But since at least a third of China’s hog herd has been wiped out, these measures will not generate instant results. Local authorities have taken matters into their own hands. Several cities, including Nanning, a provincial capital, have started offering limited amounts of discount pork. Others are providing cash support to low-income residents. China has also started to release meat from its frozen-pork reserves—created in the 1970s for just such emergencies. But they cover barely a tenth of the shortfall. On September 10th Life Times, a Communist Party-managed newspaper, had an unusual banner headline: “Pork, it’s better for you to eat less”. It dressed up its article as healthy-eating advice, but readers surmised that it was trying to put lipstick on a very pricey pig. Yet the Chinese government’s bigger concern is affordability, not inflation. Pork, along with rice, is close to a daily necessity for many in China. The word “meat” by itself almost always refers to pork. But whereas everyone grumbles about price increases, the pain is felt most acutely by the poor, because they spend more of their income on food. “I feel less free,” says Ms Zhang, a retiree doing her morning shopping at a Shanghai market. “I’ve got to be very careful, and if I go over-budget, I have to cut back on what I buy.” For many people, though, pork has diminished in importance over the past decade, both as a share of their dinners and, more notably, as a share of their overall spending. Nationally, beef and fish have grown in popularity, while consumption of pork has levelled off. Middle-class urbanites, not to mention the wealthy, are spending their money on much else besides. In 2010 a researcher at the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences estimated that pork made up 10% of China’s consumer price index (CPI). Analysts now reckon that it is little more than 2% of the CPI basket. Moreover, the government knows that it takes more than pork for inflation to be a problem. In 2008 and 2011, inflationary spikes followed big increases in the money supply; price rises, though pronounced for pork, were a much broader phenomenon. Over the past couple of years the money supply has grown much more slowly as regulators have pushed banks to reduce their leverage. Prices of industrial goods have fallen into deflationary territory; the producer price index declined by 0.8% in August from a year earlier. The timing of African swine fever is highly inconvenient for the central bank. But most analysts think it will be written off as a temporary supply shock, albeit a big one. In the meantime people are adjusting. Liu Zhiqiang, a retired factory worker in Beijing, used to treat his family to pork ribs once a week. “Now I just toss some pork shavings into fried dishes and have more eggs instead,” he says. Xishaoye, a restaurant chain popular for pork-filled crispy buns, said that it was researching whether it could use chicken as an alternative. All going well, China will emerge from this mess with larger, better-managed pig farms. If the hog cycle became less volatile, pork would fade away as an inflation indicator. And China’s pigs would go back to where they belong, braised by chefs rather than appraised by economists.