IN TERMS OF barrels per day, the attacks on Saudi Arabia’s oil installations on September 14th constituted the biggest shock the global oil market has ever suffered. But so much has supply increased in recent years that, as a share of global output, four earlier upheavals were more serious. All were in the Middle East, of which the most acute was the Iranian revolution in 1978-79, which cut off 8.8% of global oil. This time, Aramco, the Saudi state-owned giant, lost 60% of the kingdom’s output, but just 5.7% of the world’s.  That helps to explain the speed with which the oil price recovered from its spike—of about 20%—when markets first opened after the attack. Turmoil also broke out elsewhere in the financial markets, as America's overnight “repo” rate suddenly shot up. That is what American banks pay to raise cash overnight, against high-quality securities such as Treasury bonds. A sudden surge in the rate forced the Fed to inject cash into the system. The problems seem more technical than economic. But that did not quite erase the memory that a similar spike in the repo rate in 2007 was a harbinger of the financial crisis to come. A downturn in another market—that for IPOs in highly-valued tech start-ups, or “unicorns”—is bringing problems to Masayoshi Son, who controls Softbank and is the mastermind behind its $100bn Vision Fund, whose biggest backer is Saudi Arabia’s sovereign-wealth fund. This week, one of its biggest investments, WeWork, was forced to postpone a planned IPO. Investors cannot decide what the firm is worth. SoftBank’s own share price has fallen by 20% since July. The World Bank has produced the third of its reports to be co-written with a Chinese government think-tank, the Development Research Centre. Despite its provenance, and despite cautious phrasing, the report, “Innovative China”, offers evidence of flaws in China’s economic model: a much-puffed rise in business creation has been overstated; capital-allocation is becoming less efficient; and bankruptcies are rare, leaving zombie companies stalking the land.