THE STORY OF the Bauhaus has been told many times in its centenary year. The groundbreaking school of art and design was founded in Germany in 1919 by Walter Gropius, an architect fond of simple constructions, and its influence can be seen in buildings from Chicago to Sydney. Yet the Bauhaus only lasted 14 years. It became embroiled in political rows: conservatives on the right, including Nazis, considered it “degenerate”, utopian and Bolshevist, while the left thought it lacked a clear ideology. In 1924 it was forced out of Weimar. It moved in 1925 to Dessau, a more liberal town in what is today Saxony-Anhalt, and then to Berlin in 1932. It is these three sites which have been chiefly responsible for the centenary celebrations. Berlin has hosted a number of exhibitions—and is currently in the process of renovating and extending the Bauhaus Archive buildings—while Weimar and Dessau have opened museums dedicated to the school. The opening of the Bauhaus Museum Dessau on September 8th was the last major event marking the anniversary. Roberto Gonzalez and Addenda Architects won a competition in 2015 to design the building, and they have created something stylishly straightforward out of steel, glass and concrete. Mr Gonzalez says he particularly admires the work of Mies van der Rohe, the last director of the school, who is known for his aphorism that “less is more”. “Our maxim was ‘more with less’,” Mr Gonzalez says, choosing a design that provided maximum impact from minimal spending.  At the centre of this new museum is a “Black Box”, a closed concrete cube which can hold around 1,200 exhibits from the Dessau Bauhaus Foundation’s collection of more than 49,000 items (other treasures from the archives will be displayed in future shows). The box is suspended five metres above visitors’ heads, supported by only two staircases. As well as time and budget restrictions, the architects had to be mindful of the artefacts’ sensitivity to light and temperature. Mr Gonzalez describes the facade—which surrounds the black box, houses the foyer and protects the building from extreme weather conditions—as a “winter coat of glass”. The centrepiece of the collection in Weimar is a donation that Gropius made to the city, mostly of furniture and items for children. The Dessau museum, meanwhile, focuses on the experimental creative process of the Bauhäusler. The inaugural exhibition explores the prosperous and productive years of the Bauhaus in Dessau under the direction of Gropius (until 1928), Hannes Meyer (1928-1930) and van der Rohe (1930-1932). In eight sections the visitor gains insight into the new methods of learning they championed—which emphasised collaboration between teacher and student as well as among the students themselves—as well as the discrete stages from first draft to final product. Thanks to its acquisition in 1976 of a comprehensive collection of studies, photographs and sketches, the Bauhaus Museum Dessau is displaying many historical documents which have not been seen in their entirety in public before. There are diaries, books and collages on show which survey the inception of consumer goods such as the Wassily Chair, designed by Marcel Breuer in 1925-26, and the Weißenhof armchair designed by van der Rohe in 1927. The influence of Wassily Kandinsky, who taught at the school from 1922 to 1933, on Grete Reichardt, one of his students, is clear: she wove his pioneering abstract shapes into textile art, carpets and table runners. The artefacts on display are thus situated in their proper intellectual and artistic context. “We focused this show on the vision of the Bauhaus members and their worldwide impact,” says Detlef Weitz, the chief curator. Bauhaus fans often make their way to Dessau to see the original Bauhaus School and the four reconstructed Meisterhäuser—cubic houses built for the leaders of the movement and occupied at various points by Gropius, Laszlo Moholy-Nagy, Lionel Feininger, Oskar Schlemmer, Georg Muche, Kandinsky and Paul Klee. This new museum is a worthy stop on the tour, with a wide array of objects and information. It provides an insight into the daily workings of the Bauhaus school, and a detailed overview of the global network of artists that were inspired by or affiliated with it. A century on, the Bauhaus is still in style. Read more: Kinks in the clean lines of the Bauhaus The life of Walter Gropius, founder of the Bauhaus