THE MOST controversial film in competition at this year’s Venice Film Festival is “J’Accuse” or “An Officer and a Spy”, not because of its subject or its style, but because it is directed by Roman Polanski. After Mr Polanski pleaded guilty to “unlawful intercourse with a minor” in America in 1977 he absconded from the country, but he was quickly forgiven by Hollywood. In 2003 he won an Oscar for directing “The Pianist”—not that he could collect his trophy in Los Angeles without risking arrest. But after the Harvey Weinstein scandal and the birth of the #MeToo movement, Hollywood had second thoughts about handing Mr Polanski a “Get Out Of Jail Free” card. The Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences expelled him in March 2018 (he has since commenced legal proceedings against the Academy), and numerous stars took back the support they had lent him over the decades. But none of that stopped “An Officer and a Spy” from premiering at one of the world’s most prestigious cinema jamborees. The festival’s director, Alberto Barbera, has argued that Mr Polanski, now aged 86, is “one of the last masters in European cinema”, and so the decision to include his film was a no-brainer. Many commentators disagree. Adapted from Robert Harris’s novel, and co-written by Mr Harris and Mr Polanski, the film dramatises the Dreyfus affair, in which a Jewish major in the French army, Alfred Dreyfus, was wrongly convicted of selling secrets to Germany. Mr Polanski has told reporters that he knows a thing or two about such unjust anti-Semitic persecution himself, thus implying that “An Officer and a Spy” is, on one level, his angry response to his drop in stature. But there are few signs of any deep personal investment in the finished product, a handsome period drama which trudges methodically through events in Paris at the end of the 19th century, but which only sporadically becomes more exciting than a Wikipedia entry.  Jean Dujardin, an Oscar winner for his lead role in “The Artist”, plays Georges Picquart, the newly appointed head of military intelligence. Perpetually frowning in confusion, but hanging onto his dignity with the help of his smart uniform, neat moustache and jutting jaw, he keeps being called into his superiors’ panelled offices for a dressing down, thus raising the question of why Mr Dujardin hasn’t yet been cast as Inspector Clouseau in a Hollywood reboot of “The Pink Panther”. Poking around the grubby and disorganised office he himself has just been assigned, he soon realises that the evidence against Dreyfus (Louis Garrel, unrecognisable beneath his prosthetic make-up) is literally paper thin: it amounts to one letter bearing handwriting that is vaguely similar to Dreyfus’s. (Mathieu Amalric has a fun cameo as a dotty graphologist.) While the prisoner languishes in exile on a none-too-convincing digital recreation of a tropical island, Picquart rifles through secret files, and keeps an eye on officers who come to can-can shows with their mistresses. At this stage, there are brief glimpses of what might have been: a gripping detective yarn, with almost as many magnifying glasses and bowlers hats as a Sherlock Holmes adventure. Later, there are some bursts of action when Emile Zola’s pro-Dreyfus editorial results in his books being tossed on a bonfire, and when Picquart—whose own anti-Semitism, unlike his fellow officers', does not obstruct his devotion to the truth—fights a duel and dodges an assassin’s bullets. There are also some glimmers of satire when someone grumbles about the foreigners who have degraded France beyond recognition: when it comes to xenophobes, plus ça change, plus c'est la même chose. But most of “An Officer and a Spy” is a respectable, if disappointingly drawn-out succession of briefings and debriefings in which various interchangeable whiskery officials tell the stolid Picquart to mind his own business. It isn’t one of Mr Polanski’s worst films, but it’s hardly as thrilling as a story with so much heroism and so many reversals of fortune should be. If it doesn’t win any prizes in Venice, that won’t necessarily be because of the director’s status as a partial pariah, but simply because it isn’t quite good enough.