THINK OF AN economist, and your mind will probably conjure up a white man. Ever since the days of Adam Smith, the profession has been dominated by the pale and the male. Although the field is gradually becoming more diverse, a new report by the Brookings Institution, a think-tank, finds this is happening more quickly in some places than others. The report, by Louise Sheiner, David Wessel and Michael Ng, finds that America’s government employs a more diverse array of economists than do its universities. Some 30% of the PhD economists beavering away in the federal bureaucracy are women; 24% are black, Hispanic, Asian or other minorities. In academia, meanwhile, just 23% and 21% of economics faculty are women and minorities, respectively.  This disparity may be driven in part by preferences. Within academia, women tend to cluster in certain sub-fields, disproportionately choosing to study the economics of labour, education, and health. Evidence of such predispositions can be seen in government, too. At the Department of Health and Human Services, 48% of staff economists are women. At the Department of Labour, the share is 37%. In the army, by contrast, just 8% of economists are female. Other gaps are harder to explain by reference to preferences alone. It is unclear, for example, why the Government Accountability Office should be the only agency that the authors find has a majority female share of its PhD economists. The study also finds that female and minority employment levels vary significantly across different branches of the Federal Reserve system. Just 12% of the economists employed at the San Francisco Federal Reserve are minorities, compared with 41% at the Philadelphia branch. Although the gaps could partly be explained by preferences for the different styles of economics happening at the different institutions, or perhaps even the ease of locating two-earner couples in a particular place, the differences seem large enough to suggest that other factors must be contributing too. At the St Louis Federal Reserve, just three of the 30 PhD economists are women, compared with 12 of the 28 at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston. Such imbalances go unexplained in the report. But David Wessel, one of the study’s authors, noted that simply asking the question tended to spark conversations about staff diversity. Whatever the cause, Janet Yellen, a former head of the Federal Reserve, said that although recent trends were encouraging, there was much more to be done. “If economists are mainly of one gender or race, they are likely to miss things that matter,” she said.