HOW MANY Republicans does it take to change a lightbulb? Americans may soon find out. On September 4th the Trump administration announced that it was rolling back energy-efficiency standards for household bulbs. The rules, which environmental groups say would lower energy bills and reduce carbon emissions by millions of tonnes per year, were set to come into force in 2020. But the administration says they are “not economically justified” and will limit consumer choice. The Department of Energy says its action “will ensure that the choice of how to light homes and businesses is left to the American people, not the federal government.” The controversy is reminiscent of the lightbulb wars of Barack Obama’s presidency. In 2010 Republican lawmakers became preoccupied with a set of standards, contained in a law known as the Energy Independence and Security Act, aimed at boosting the energy efficiency of American household bulbs by 25%. Although the regulations did not ban any bulbs outright, they were designed to phase out traditional incandescent bulbs in favour of more efficient compact fluorescent lights (CFLs) and light-emitting diodes (LEDs). These newer bulbs cost more up front but save consumers money over the long-term. LEDs, for example, use 75-80% less energy than incandescents, last 25 times longer and produce about ten times as much light per watt (see chart).  Although passed with bipartisan support in Congress and signed by George W. Bush in 2007, for some Republicans the regulations became a symbol of the federal government’s intrusion into Americans’ lives. Tea-party Republicans decried the rules as an assault on personal freedoms. Presidential candidates such as Michele Bachmann, a former congresswoman from Minnesota, railed against them on the campaign trail. “If you want to buy Thomas Edison’s wonderful invention,” she declared in 2011, “you should be able to!” Despite such efforts, the rules stayed; Edison-style incandescent bulbs continued to lose market share. Last week’s decision seems to be motivated more by undoing the work of Mr Trump’s predecessor than championing consumer choice. In the final days of Mr Obama’s administration, the energy department eliminated some exemptions in the 2007 law, thereby expanding the efficiency standards to four additional types of bulb. According to an estimate by the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, the change would reduce carbon emissions by 540m tonnes over the next ten years and save consumers $120bn over 30. Mr Trump was apparently unconvinced. He said he was scrapping the rule because “what's saved is not worth it”.