MARIE STOPES’S marriage to Reginald Ruggles Gates was not a long or a happy one. In 1912, a year after their wedding, she sought legal advice; a year after that, she filed for divorce, claiming that the union had never been consummated. As she instigated divorce proceedings, Stopes decided to reflect on what she had learned from the sorry affair. “Were I to touch upon all the possible sources of marital disappointment and unhappiness,” she quipped, “this book would expand into a dozen bulky volumes.” She hoped instead to offer some observations on what makes a partnership happy and successful, and to save other young couples “years of heartache”. In “Married Love; or, Love in Marriage”, she preached the importance of mutual respect and freedom, and allowing women to pursue their intellectual interests. She reminded men that they must practise the “Art of Love” throughout marriage, not merely in its heady early days. But what made “Married Love” a sensation after its publication in 1918—it sold 2,000 copies in the first two weeks—was its forthright approach to sex. Though she claimed still to be a virgin herself, Stopes described the act in scientific terms (and indeed recommended positions in which to “make it quite satisfactory”). She contemplated the appropriate frequency of sexual union and reflected on the importance of birth control. “That girls can reach a marriageable age without some knowledge of the realities of sex would seem incredible: but it is a fact,” Stopes wrote. “There are known not a few cases in which the horror of the first night of marriage...has driven the bride to suicide or insanity.”  She invited her readers to write to her and share their own experiences—and write they did. In “Wise Parenthood”, a book published later in 1918 which dealt with the subject of contraception in more detail, Stopes said that so many people had sent letters “that it became impossible to answer each one personally”. Thousands wrote to her with hopes, fears, queries and confessions. One correspondent admits that they “do not know how to begin”, given the sensitive nature of the complaint. Many who sought out Stopes were desperate: “Please believe, please believe that I need your help” and “I have been with two doctors but they can’t say what is wrong or what to do.” “Dear Marie Stopes”, a new chamber opera, opens with spoken recordings of snippets of these letters. A soprano, contralto and countertenor—ie, two female singers and one male—give voice to others. A woman asks for Stopes’s advice: she has had 14 children, and her doctor has said that if she has another her weak heart will give out. A man laments a problem with premature ejaculation. A woman is scared by “the thought of marital relations” and has no mother or sister to ask for guidance; another has contracted venereal disease and is desperate to be cured. Of course, not all those who wrote to Stopes were pleased that she had discussed such private matters publicly. Referring to Stopes’s Scottish ancestry, one angry correspondent informed her that she should “go back to [her] own country” for “decent English people are disgusted by your filthy suggestions”. Jennifer Thorp, the librettist, scoured these letters, which are kept in the archive at the Wellcome Collection in London. “The weight of the pleas and vitriol that came at Stopes for decades almost has to be seen to be believed,” she says. “She was a public beacon of aid in an age where birth control was highly illegal, sexual education was obscure and women in particular were often kept in the dark.” Ms Thorp argues that the missives are well-suited to opera not only because of their emotional intensity but also because they had a kind of rhythm and pattern. They are set to music which is haunting but simple, driven by a cello and a viola da gamba. Something “atonal and angular would have distracted from the intimacy of the text,” Alex Mills, the composer, says. Stopes features in the opera—intriguingly, her parts are sung by the male countertenor so that her voice is more easily distinguishable from those of the letter-writers—but she is not its main subject. To have told the story of her life would have meant delving into the more controversial aspects of her legacy, particularly her views on eugenics, which were bound up with her attitude towards birth control (she thought that it was necessary to “deal with the inferior, the depraved and feeble-minded” so that “the good in our race is not to be swamped and destroyed”). “Dear Marie Stopes” acknowledges those views, but it prefers to focus on the people she helped through her writings and, later, through her birth-control clinic, which was the first of its kind in Britain. “The opera brings home the immense human cost of sexual repression and illegal contraception, and how much damage it wrought on millions of private lives,” Ms Thorp says. After its performances in London, Mr Mills hopes to take the opera to America, where, today, the debate around reproductive rights is particularly febrile. But he stresses that its message, about the importance of education and access to family-planning services, applies to the developing world, too. It is there that an international charity set up in Marie Stopes’s name focuses its resources. “There are more than 200m [women] around the world who don’t want to get pregnant but can’t get modern contraception,” the organisation’s website says. It provides more than 25m people with the help they need.