HAVING SPENT the first nine months of her speakership applying the brakes, Nancy Pelosi seems to have found the throttle. On September 23rd she announced the House was beginning impeachment proceedings against President Donald Trump for allegedly soliciting Ukraine’s government for dirt on Joe Biden, the Democratic front-runner, and his son Hunter, who sat on the board of a Ukrainian energy firm. On the morning of September 27th she told a news crew that William Barr, the attorney-general, had “gone rogue” by engaging in “a cover-up of the cover-up”. She also alleged that Joseph Maguire, the acting Director of National Intelligence “broke the law”. That is an uncharitable interpretation of Mr Maguire’s actions. A day earlier he had testified before the House Intelligence Committee for three hours about his handling of a whistleblower’s report that prompted Ms Pelosi to launch the impeachment inquiry. Ahead of that testimony, the committee released an unclassified version of the report.  Its contents were largely already known; it still makes striking reading. Filed, according to the New York Times, by a veteran intelligence analyst deeply familiar with Ukranian politics who was once detailed to the White House, it accuses Mr Trump of “using the power of his office to solicit foreign interference in the 2020 US Election”. It says the president put pressure on Volodymyr Zelensky, Ukraine’s newly elected president, to investigate Mr Biden’s son. Hunter. Mr Trump released a transcript of that call one day earlier, apparently thinking it was exculpatory; instead, it gave substance to the complaint. The whistleblower also accuses Rudolph Giuliani, one of the president’s personal lawyers, and Mr Barr, who as attorney-general is not supposed to act like one of the president’s personal lawyers, of complicity in this effort. Mr Giuliani was apparently so zealous in his efforts that American ambassadors spoke to him to try to “contain the damage” he was doing to American national security. Not only did the whistleblower believe Mr Trump’s behaviour threatened national security, but “White House officials...were deeply disturbed by what had transpired during the call.” After the call ended, he writes, “officials intervened to ‘lock down’ all records,” moving the transcript onto a secure system generally reserved for sensitive phone calls, even though “the call did not contain anything remotely sensitive from a national-security perspective”—just behaviour that Mr Trump and his associates understood would embarrass them if it became known. That background provided a target-rich environment for Democrats questioning Mr Maguire. Their aim, though, was appalling; too many of their questions concerned process rather than the substance of the whistleblower’s complaint. That is partly understandable. Adam Schiff, the committee chair, believed that Mr Maguire’s failure to deliver the whistleblower’s complaint to Congress violated the law. But impeachment hearings must galvanise public support, as well as ascertain what happened; process-based questions rarely do that. And Mr Maguire’s response—that the complaint was unprecedented, because it concerned the president; so he sought advice from the Justice Department’s Office of Legal Counsel (OLC), which advised him not to deliver it to Congress—was eminently reasonable, both as a matter of procedure and as a “cover-your-ass” manoeuvre. Some tried to press him on the wisdom of going to Mr Barr, who was named in the complaint, but Mr Barr is the attorney-general, and the OLC is the sole source of legal advice for the executive branch. Mr Maguire, a 36-year Navy veteran, has devoted his life to public service; he came off as a straight shooter caught in a difficult situation. He declined to be drawn by either side into making political judgments. The Democrats’ obsession with process made them seem petty and small. Not until Mr Schiff’s final round of questions did the Democrats land a blow against the administration. Mr Schiff got Mr Maguire to admit “there is going to be an investigation,” and that he believed the complaint to be “credible”. Congress is now on a two-week recess. Ms Pelosi reportedly wants impeachment wrapped up and voted on by year’s end, which gives her just seven weeks, presuming she does not cancel the Thanksgiving or Christmas recesses. She will have to keep her caucus and hearings focused. Given the number of Mr Trump’s alleged misdeeds, under investigation by various committees, that will not be easy. The Trump administration, meanwhile, will have to contend with what one veteran of Bill Clinton’s White House described as “a political black hole.” Mr Clinton was able to shunt impeachment off to one side of his mind and stay focused on legislation. Mr Trump has evinced no such gifts. In a public appearance with America’s mission to the UN yesterday, he said he wanted to know “who’s the person who gave the information to the whistleblower, because that’s close to a spy. You know what we used to do in the old days when we were smart with spies and treason, right? We used to handle them a little bit differently.” Perhaps the White House could use the next couple of weeks, during which Congress is in recess, to come up with a better line than musing about the electric chair. But perhaps they do not need to. After all, Democrats have been waiting for the hammer blow to fall on Mr Trump for a while. He has survived boasting of committing sexual assault, insulting John McCain and the families of soldiers killed in military action, and Robert Mueller’s extensive investigation into his campaign’s alleged collusion with Russia and his apparent obstruction of justice. Polls show a slight increase in support for impeachment, but not much. If the Democrats want to move the needle further, they will have to do better than they did on Thursday.