ON SEPTEMBER 11TH, the Supreme Court handed Donald Trump a temporary but significant win in a battle over his plan to crack down on migrants seeking asylum on America’s southern border. The decision permits the administration to begin turning away the vast majority of migrants seeking protection at the US-Mexico border hailing from Guatemala, El Salvador, Honduras and elsewhere. If these individuals fleeing persecution or gang violence cannot prove they have applied for and been denied asylum in another country, they are ineligible to apply in America. This big change to asylum rules, announced on July 16th, had been stymied in court—until now. Days after the Trump administration announced it would tighten requirements for asylum applicants, a federal judge blocked the move as a violation of federal immigration law and the Administrative Procedures Act, a law dictating how regulations may be changed. The Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals then upheld the district court’s injunction but narrowed it: the old asylum regime would hold in California and Arizona (since they are within the boundaries of Ninth Circuit) but the Trump administration would be free to impose its new rule in Texas and New Mexico, states belonging to other circuits.  Judge Jon Tigar, the judge who originally blocked Mr Trump’s policy, then reinstated the national injunction on September 9th. He cited new evidence showing that the plaintiffs (organisations dedicated to assisting migrants) would be negatively impacted by the tightened asylum rules by having to retrain staff and dedicate extra resources to helping asylum applicants navigate the new strictures. These “organisational and diversion-of-resources harms” are significant and extend outside the Ninth Circuit’s borders, Judge Tigar reasoned, so only a nationwide injunction against Mr Trump’s policy would bring them relief. That decision had a short half-life. On September 10th, the Ninth Circuit reversed it. Later that day, the administration sent another plea to the Supreme Court. Though Judge Tigar’s nationwide injunction was no more, his original injunction—duly trimmed by the Ninth Circuit—still applied in California and Arizona. The legal circus, the administration wrote, “resulted in the rule’s implementation, cessation and implementation again in the Fifth and Tenth Circuits”. Whether the Ninth Circuit ultimately decides the policy should be blocked “nationwide or circuitwide”, the Supreme Court should step in. A day later, the high court granted that request, blocking both of Judge Tigar’s injunctions “in full” at least until the Ninth Circuit completes its review of the case. If the government ultimately loses at the circuit court and seeks review at the Supreme Court, the injunction will stay in place until the justices act. The upshot: thousands of migrants seeking asylum status in America will be turned away while the legal battle continues into the autumn and winter. The decision prompted a full-throated critique from two justices. Writing for herself and Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg, Justice Sonia Sotomayor noted that Mr Trump has “once again” pursued a policy to “upend longstanding practices regarding refugees who seek shelter from persecution”. The stakes for imperiled migrants “could not be higher”, she wrote, and the government’s plea to stop the injunction in its tracks—before the lower courts conclude review—is an “extraordinary request” that “simultaneously lags behind and jumps ahead of the courts below”. The majority of the Supreme Court “acquiesces” to Mr Trump’s demand, Justice Sotomayor wrote, and poses risks not only to migrants with no safe home but to “the interbranch governmental processes that encourage deliberation, public participation and transparency”. She closed by citing a forthcoming article documenting Mr Trump’s surge in requests for extraordinary relief at the Supreme Court by Stephen Vladeck, a law professor at the University of Texas. Mr Trump is treating the “exceptional mechanism” of early Supreme Court review, the dissent lamented, “as a new normal”. Only two members of the court signed the dissent, but a quirk of Supreme Court procedure means there is no way to know how the other justices voted. It is probably safe to assume that the five conservative justices sided with Mr Trump. The silence of the two unmentioned liberal justices—Elena Kagan and Stephen Breyer—does not mean they joined the right flank. It only means they did not choose to pen dissents of their own, sign Justice Sotomayor’s dissent, or make a note of their votes. No matter how the secret-ballot vote came out, Mr Trump was given fodder for a triumphant tweet (“BIG United States Supreme Court WIN for the Border on Asylum!”) and a fresh reminder that the Supreme Court appears to increasingly be his reliable ally. The “million-dollar question”, Mr Vladeck says, is whether the court’s recently expanded deference to the executive branch is “a neutral shift” or “only good for presidents to whom a majority of the justices are sympathetic”.