THE DUBLINERS, a pub in central Tokyo, is primed for an onslaught of beer-swigging rugby fans. Kegs are stacked behind the counter and flags hang from the ceiling. Foreigners, mostly from Britain, Australia and Ireland, have bought a third of the 1.8m tickets sold for the sport’s World Cup, which kicks off on September 20th. “We’ve heard they drink a lot,” smiles Yosuke Yamashita, a waiter. “We’re ready.” Japan’s opening match against Russia will be the first game in the tournament’s 32-year history to be played beyond rugby’s traditional heartlands. Rugby’s top 20 international teams will compete over the following seven weeks to lift the Webb Ellis Cup. The favourites, South Africa and New Zealand (trying for their third consecutive title), face off in Yokohama on September 21st.  Japan’s unpredictable weather has already been a factor in the competition. The arrival of several teams in the country was disrupted by a ferocious storm that cut power to 900,000 homes in the Tokyo area and grounded hundreds of flights at the main international airport. Athletes from the cooler northern climates have been practising for the humidity and rain by smearing the ball in baby oil and shampoo, not the normal tools of the trade for props and hookers. Rugby arrived in Japan with the opening of treaty ports 150 years ago, but it is still a niche game in the country. Most of its international players spring from the semi-professional league, which has long been sponsored by heavy manufacturing industries. Unless the home team is playing, Japanese punters are more likely to be watching baseball, sumo or football. Yet the national team is battling its way up the world rankings. Its players are taller and bulkier now after years of bemoaning their lack of the size needed to topple rivals from Rugby’s traditional homelands. Four years ago, at the last World Cup, they notched up one of the sport’s biggest upsets by beating the South African Springboks. The win helped make up for the humiliation of being thrashed 145-17 by the New Zealand All Blacks in 1995. The decision by the sport’s governing body to put its showcase event in this Asian outpost is thus a nod to Japan’s growing international heft. It might well broaden rugby’s appeal beyond its traditional powerhouses, for despite ambitions to make it a world game, the competition is still dominated by the northern-hemisphere teams (England, Scotland, Ireland, Wales, France and Italy), and a handful from the south (New Zealand, Australia and South Africa). When Japan was passed over as host of the 2011 World Cup in favour of New Zealand, Yoshiro Mori, a former prime minister and famous rugby fan, testily accused the established nations of “passing the ball around their friends”. He will be gratified by this year’s rush for tickets; the 4.5m applications have taken even the organisers by surprise. From being one of the world’s more obscure holiday destinations, Japan has become its fastest-growing tourist market. Over 31m people visited last year, triple the figure for 2013. About 40m are expected in 2020, when Tokyo hosts the Olympics, the world’s biggest sporting event, for which the Rugby World Cup is something of a practice run. “This year will be key in making the games a success and ushering in a new Tokyo,” said Yuriko Koike, the city’s governor, in February. Some venues complain they are being overrun by hordes of badly behaved gaijin (foreigners). Last year the government launched its first survey on over-tourism. One reason for spacing the rugby games over 12 venues across the country is to encourage visitors to explore outside the overcrowded capital. As hotels and bars stock up on alcohol, some hot-spring resorts have been prodded to relax their rules on tattoos, which in Japan are associated with yakuza mobsters. (The All Blacks have erred on the side of caution by covering up their famous body ink in long-sleeved tops and tights.) Still, Akira Shimazu, the head of the event’s organising committee, believes Japan’s famous omotenashi, or hospitality, will smooth over any cultural bumps. Just in case, Toshiaki Hirose, the former captain of the national team, has been touring the country teaching local people all 20 national anthems.