Editor’s note: This article has been updated since publication BRITAIN’S SUPREME COURT has ruled unlawful Boris Johnson’s five-week suspension of Parliament. In a unanimous judgment read out by the court’s president, Lady Hale, the justices ruled that the prime minister’s action prevented Parliament from carrying out its constitutional functions without reasonable justification.  The Speaker of the House of Commons, John Bercow, has summoned MPs to sit on September 25th. That will not allow enough time to hold the usual Question Time with the prime minister, but Mr Bercow said MPs could table urgent questions and motions. Mr Johnson is expected to cut short his trip to the United Nations in New York, and return in time for the sessions. Opposition leaders—among them Jeremy Corbyn, the Labour leader who has brought forward his speech to the party’s conference in Brighton—called for Mr Johnson to resign. He is not likely to do that, but his own Tory party conference next week may now not take place. The judgment is devastating for the prime minister. Not only did he lose on every legal point, and do so unanimously, but also the justices in effect implied that he had misled the queen when seeking her agreement to the suspension with advice that “was unlawful, void and of no effect.” He had claimed this was necessary to prepare for a new legislative session to start on October 14th. The Supreme Court ruling says that it obstructed parliamentary scrutiny, declaring: “The effect upon the fundamentals of our democracy was extreme.” How will this affect Brexit? Mr Johnson says he “strongly disagrees” with the ruling, and still insists that Britain will leave the EU “come what may” on October 31st. Yet Parliament has legislated to insist that, if he has not secured a Brexit deal with the European Union by October 19th, he must seek an extension of that deadline. Although Mr Johnson insists he is making good progress towards an agreement, few in Brussels agree. The gap between the two sides over the so-called backstop to avert a hard border in Ireland is wide. The chances of a deal by mid-October still look small. The judgment also plays into a broader constitutional crisis in Britain. Mr Johnson and his team are trying to portray MPs, big business, much of the media and now the judiciary as implacable opponents of Brexit, bent on thwarting the wishes of the majority of voters who supported Leave in June 2016. The Supreme Court would certainly deny the charge: Lady Hale said its decision was about the government’s prerogative powers, not about Brexit at all. Yet Mr Johnson would like nothing better than to fight an election on a platform of the people versus the establishment. So far Mr Corbyn has resisted calls for an early election (his agreement is needed because it takes a two-thirds majority of MPs to vote for dissolution). But when Parliament resumes, he will face pressure to change his mind, especially if Mr Johnson concedes that a no-deal Brexit will not in fact happen on October 31st. Whether an election can either resolve Brexit or repair Britain’s battered constitution is quite another matter.