SIR ANTONY GORMLEY is best known for a heavenly body. His 20-metre-high “Angel of the North” has dominated the landscape near Gateshead, in north-east England, for more than 20 years. But his art has always centred on the human body, in most cases his own. That includes the angel. Leaving aside its massive wingspan, its body is a scaled-up version of Sir Antony’s. “Another Place”, dating from 1997, saw the artist install 100 life-sized forms cast from his own figure on Crosby Beach, near Liverpool, where they still look out to sea today, sometimes submerged by the tide. Similar shapes, placed more recently on rooftops in London and Manhattan and in the Austrian Alps, have become a Gormley trademark, ensuring recognition for the artist far beyond the art world.  At the Royal Academy (RA), “Lost Horizon” (2008) groups together 24 such cast-iron figures, some standing upright, others parallel to the floor or suspended from the ceiling. They fill a room, yet are only a small part of a show which combines new commissions with site-specific remakes of earlier work. On display is a career-spanning range of fascinating workbooks and drawings to explore the different ways in which the human body has figured in the artist’s oeuvre for 45 years. As a student in the 1970s, Sir Antony felt torn between art as revolution and art as a continuum and decided to reconcile the two by focusing on the body. Yet he has never pursued realism: there are more cubes than curves to Sir Antony’s bodies. The body, he says, is a “place”— of memory, emotion and imagination. It is the interior realm that makes us human. Throughout his career it has inspired semi-abstract pieces that invite the audience to complete the picture and seek out the humanity for themselves. “Slabworks” (2019), which opens the exhibition, sees 14 steel sculptures arranged across the floor. They look like assemblages of building blocks, yet as the visitor moves among them, they begin to suggest a human presence. One is lying on her side, propped up on one elbow. Another has been doing press-ups. And yet another is sitting back to the wall, arms folded, a picture of grumpy frustration. Similarly, “Subject II” (2019), a spiky figure made from thin steel bars, radiates dejection. “Matrix III” (2019, pictured), a complex, steel-mesh construction of intersecting cages, goes beyond the body to evoke the space humans inhabit in the world. At its heart is a small void, equivalent, the visitor is told, to the average size of a bedroom in a new-build house in Europe. Sometimes it is up to the audience to provide the body. “Clearing VII” (2019, pictured), for example, is composed of eight kilometres of coiled aluminium tube constrained only by the room’s ceiling, walls and floor. The visitor is invited to forge pathways through the tangle as gracefully or clumsily as they choose. Squeezed into another room is “Cave” (2019), a set of vast cuboid voids that, were they to be seen from afar, might be recognisable as a hunched body lying on its side, with one knee raised. The installation can be entered via one foot and exited via an arm, and enfolds the viewer in total darkness at points along the way. In what looks like the last room there is a wonderful series from the 1980s of “Red Earth Drawings” inspired by the Australian outback. Then, through an open doorway on the right, you find “Host”, a work unveiled originally in the Old City Jail, Charleston, South Carolina, in 1991 and remade for the RA. In a dramatic gesture that rivals those of Ai Weiwei and Anish Kapoor in the same galleries in earlier years, Sir Antony has filled the academy’s grand, gilded, double-height room with Buckinghamshire clay and Atlantic seawater to a depth of 23 centimetres. Serene and clear, the water shimmers in the sunshine filtering through the skylight. The rich ochre of the clay echoes the drawings in the room next door. No human form in evidence here, “Host” evokes Sir Antony’s notion of the body as a “place”—prompting thoughts and feelings about water, air and earth, the basis of life. What a magnificent conclusion to the show it makes. “Antony Gormley” is on display at the Royal Academy, London, until December 3rd