ON THE EVENING of September 4th, ten Democratic presidential candidates were given 40 minutes each to explain their plans for tackling climate change. They responded to questions from CNN’s anchors and audience members. Two questions that are sometimes asked were missing: Is climate change happening and is human activity responsible for it? Because the anchors, candidates and audience took for granted that the answers to both were yes, the seven-hour long event was refreshingly substantive. The event showed how far left the Overton window has shifted for Democratic primary voters. Candidates diverged on nuclear power—some saw it as an essential step on any viable path toward clean energy; others, notably Elizabeth Warren and Bernie Sanders, were adamantly opposed. Otherwise, candidates were asked about imposing a carbon tax and banning fossil-fuel exports and fracking. They competed over who could move to net-zero emissions fastest. These sorts of plans and questions would have been seen as laughably radical just a decade ago.  Democrats now largely agree that public lands should not be opened for drilling, that America needs some sort of price put on emissions and that it should immediately rejoin the Paris climate agreement. Two of the three frontrunners, Ms Warren and Mr Sanders, oppose fossil-fuel exports and, along with Kamala Harris, endorsed a full ban on fracking. Andrew Yang mooted a buyback for gas-powered vehicles. Amy Klobuchar’s hesitancy to endorse a fracking ban, and her endorsement of natural gas as a “transition fuel”—both sensible policies, on the merits—made her look unfashionably cautious. The night’s biggest winner may have been a former candidate not on stage (not Marianne Williamson, who, before the debate deleted a tweet claiming that “prayer, visualisation, meditation” could cause hurricanes to alter their paths). Jay Inslee dropped out of the race on August 21st, saying he would seek a third term as Washington’s governor, his poll numbers never having risen above the low single digits. But his campaign focused entirely on climate change, as governor he enacted a commendably granular clean-energy plan, and his has since become an imprimatur for other candidates’ climate plans. At least four candidates name-checked him from the stage on September 4th. The loser was Joe Biden, who struck the odd note of petulance. This should have been his night to shine. Three months ago he released a sensible but ambitious climate-change plan that forged a path to net-zero energy emissions by 2050, endorsed a green-focused industrial policy, and advocated robust international engagement. And yet somehow, all of those plans were condensed into him repeating that he knew lots of “world leaders” and had always believed in climate change. He also repeatedly touted his own credentials, which soon wears thin. His repeated insistence that other countries also had to shoulder their load, while undoubtedly correct, sounded at times like an excuse for inaction. The night’s other loser, unfortunately, was reality. Mr Biden and the refreshingly realistic Ms Klobuchar aside, the candidates touted the expanse and ambitiousness of their plans. Mr Sanders won the numbers war: he wants to spend $16tn. Asked where the money would come from, he pivoted to the oldest deflection in politics: doing nothing would be catastrophic. It would, of course. But, especially with a $1tn deficit, that question must be answered. Ms Warren wants to spend a comparatively paltry $3tn to boost “green manufacturing” and help America move to net-zero emissions from power plants, vehicles and buildings by 2030. Both of those are laudable goals. How she would get them through the Senate is less clear. It is also unclear how Kamala Harris would get rid of fossil-fuel subsidies and spend $10tn to combat climate change if Mitch McConnell still controlled the Senate. Perhaps such complaints are ungenerous. After all, the event was essentially a beauty pageant with primary voters judging. The format and audience reward maximalism. Perhaps observers should treat the candidates’ plans to spend trillions combating climate change the same way they treat Republican promises to outlaw abortion: as flag-planting rather than concrete policy. But in 15 months, someone on that stage may have to drag the meat of good intentions into the sausage factory of policy-making. Voters should be curious about what comes out on the other side.