AFTER A noisy and often raucous emergency Brexit debate, British MPs late on September 3rd inflicted a stunning defeat on Boris Johnson’s government. By the unexpectedly large majority of 27 votes, the House of Commons took control of the agenda for September 4th. That will allow the introduction of a bill to stop Britain leaving the European Union with no deal on October 31st. Instead the bill declares that, if the prime minister has not reached an accord with the EU by October 19th, he should ask for an extension of the Brexit deadline, initially to January 31st 2020. Mr Johnson responded to his defeat with characteristic belligerence. He declared that he would propose an early election in October to decide who should represent Britain in negotiations in Brussels. He had earlier branded the bill “Jeremy Corbyn’s surrender bill”, berating the leader of the Labour opposition for siding with the EU. He threatened Conservative rebels with ejection from the party, though this did not stop as many as 21 of them defying him. Those who later had the Tory whip withdrawn include former cabinet ministers and even Sir Nicholas Soames, the grandson of Winston Churchill, Mr Johnson’s idol.  The prime minister claimed that the bill would undermine his negotiating position with the EU, and he insisted there were no circumstances in which he would seek an extension of the Brexit deadline beyond October 31st. All this came after Mr Johnson announced on August 28th that parliament would be suspended for almost five weeks from next week, giving MPs very little time in which to manoeuvre. Yet Mr Johnson also accepted that he would observe the rule of law. If the planned bill becomes an act, which given the size of his defeat looks likely within days (unless the House of Lords filibusters it), he will perforce be bound by its terms. The only way to reconcile this with his refusal to seek an extension is indeed to hold an election. But Mr Johnson does not have the unilateral power to call an election. Under the 2011 Fixed-term Parliaments Act, this can be done only if two-thirds of MPs vote for it. Mr Corbyn now says the Labour opposition will not do so until the anti-no-deal bill becomes law. That will stymie Mr Johnson’s plan, at least for a while. There may be ways round the 2011 act, but it could take Mr Johnson time to find them—the more so since he has so comprehensively lost his Commons majority. Nor is it certain that Mr Johnson would win an election, even if he manages to call one for October 14th, as he hopes. He has opened up a sizeable poll lead over Mr Corbyn. But he is vulnerable on his right to Nigel Farage’s Brexit Party. Mr Farage will do a pact with Mr Johnson (to avoid splitting the Brexit vote) only if the prime minister explicitly goes for no-deal, but Mr Johnson still claims he will in fact get a deal. Mr Johnson could also lose Tory seats in London, Scotland and the south-west. His predecessor, Theresa May, called an election in 2017 when she had a huge opinion-poll lead, only to finish with a hung parliament. Mr Johnson could easily do the same.