TWENTY YEARS ago, Hollywood started to reckon with the internet. “The Blair Witch Project” (1999) was the first major film to understand online marketing, stoking debates in chat rooms over whether its footage was real or fictional. That same year, “The Matrix” explored the possibilities of the internet in a narrative at once utopian and dystopian. Yet it was a third film, which had its premiere on September 10th 1999, which was most prescient in its understanding of how the internet era would play out. The first rule is: you do not talk about it. The legacy of “Fight Club” is long and complex. Based on a book by Chuck Palahniuk, it is a satirical thriller about a young office worker known only as The Narrator (Edward Norton). He teams up with Tyler Durden (Brad Pitt), a charismatic radical, to start an underground boxing club that evolves into an anarchist movement. Though the film underperformed at the box office, and received middling reviews from critics, it struck a chord with young men. The film’s poster adorned university dorm rooms, while the critical community, which itself includes many young men, later deemed it a cult classic. As the careers of Mr Pitt and David Fincher, the director, flourished, “Fight Club” came to be revered both for Mr Pitt’s bravura lead performance and its satire of corporate culture and American masculinity.  Yet two decades on, the film has become a fillip for internet trolls. On sites such as Reddit, 4chan and 8chan, where some forums cultivate misogyny and real-world violence, “male rampage” films such as “American Psycho” and “Fight Club” are frequently praised. The character of Durden is often quoted by disaffected male users for his anti-consumerist rhetoric (“Things you own end up owning you”), his critique of the feminisation of society (“I’m wondering if another woman is really the answer we need”), and his rejection of liberal individualism (“You are not a beautiful and unique snowflake”). In fact, “Fight Club” is something of a sacred text. According to 4chan users, the first rule of the internet is “You do not talk about /b/,” referring to the popular “random” board of 4chan that is home to its most provocative posts. Although “Fight Club” makes no direct reference to the internet, it is easy to see why the film has resonated with its users. It is eventually revealed that The Narrator has split personality disorder and has created the persona of Durden to liberate himself from social constraints. As Durden explains: “I act like you want to act...I’m free in all the ways you are not.” The Narrator has conjured up a stronger, more confident character to anonymously act out the darker impulses stifled by civil society—rather like an anonymous online avatar. Indeed, much as young men are radicalised on the internet, Durden’s behaviour becomes more extreme as the film progresses. He starts off with petty pranks. As a banquet waiter, he urinates in the soup served to a room full of socialites. In his job as a movie projectionist he splices single frames of pornographic images into children’s films. Only later does he recruit a group of similarly disaffected, mostly white, young men to join Project Mayhem, whereby they engage in an amalgam of performance art and criminal mischief. They smash up a coffee shop, destroy cable antennae and plan to blow up the buildings of credit-card companies to eliminate private debt. For impressionable young troublemakers, the film must have seemed like a how-to manual for perpetrating anarchy: both The Narrator and Durden speak directly to the camera at times, explaining their techniques and motivations. It is this close identification with Durden that many critics have rebuked, arguing that the film implicitly endorses the character’s violence. In 1999 the late Roger Ebert wrote in his review that “Fight Club” is “the most frankly and cheerfully fascist big-star movie since ‘Death Wish’, a celebration of violence in which the heroes write themselves a licence to drink, smoke, screw and beat one another up.” Laurie Penny, a feminist writer, recently said that “the film has so much fun with Tyler Durden as a mad phantom from the id that it forgets that he’s meant to be frightening.” Indeed, in Mr Palahniuk’s novel, the character of Durden is more psychopathic and less sympathetic. Yet two decades later, the impact of “Fight Club” can still be felt in online communities, cinematic discourse, even politics. It foreshadowed the dark paths that anonymous individuals would be lead down. It gave voice to a disaffected group that demands to be heard ever more loudly.