KAMALA HARRIS was expected to be a strong presidential candidate. She has a strong résumé as a prosecutor, district-attorney, state attorney-general and senator. She is telegenic, a good public speaker and even better interrogator, as displayed in her punchy questioning of President Donald Trump’s judicial nominees. As the daughter of an Indian mother and Jamaican father and the first African-American to become a state attorney-general, her biography could endear her to minority and progressive voters, too. In June, during the first Democratic debate, those virtues elided as Ms Harris excoriated Joe Biden, the frontrunner, for his opposition in the 1970s to school bussing, a policy Ms Harris had benefited from as a child. In the following days, her fundraising and polling numbers surged. A little over two months later her campaign seems to have squandered that opportunity. Ms Harris is well behind in what increasingly looks like a three-way race between Mr Biden, Elizabeth Warren and Bernie Sanders. In the second debate in July, when Ms Harris was repeatedly put on the defensive over her record on criminal justice and her health-care positions, her performance was less impressive. Since then, her polling numbers have languished: The Economist’s poll aggregator has her at 7% (Mr Biden is at 27%; Ms Warren at 19% and Mr Sanders at 15%). This week, Politico got hold of a memo accidentally left by members of her campaign team in a restaurant in New Hampshire which referred to her campaign’s “summer slump.”  The problem is less her debate performance than the muddled campaign she has run. Over the summer, she looked as if she could not decide whether she would win more votes as a progressive or moderate. That has led to some policy vacillations, most damagingly over health care. Initially she backed the “Medicare for all” plan proposed by Mr Sanders and endorsed by Ms Warren, which would put all Americans onto government plans. But she reneged on that and produced a plan that preserved private insurance for some. That didn’t have its intended effect, of appealing to moderates and progressives alike. It left her looking opportunistic and uncommitted. Now, Ms Harris’s campaign appears to be making a final push to break through. On September 12th she will join ten candidates—from a field that is still 20-strong—for the third Democratic debate in Houston, Texas. Earlier in the week, she unveiled her plan for criminal justice reform. Broad in scope and ambitious, it focuses on reducing mass incarceration, restricting the use of deadly force by police and legalising marijuana federally—a move aimed at reducing incarceration for non-violent drug offences. It would also end the use of private prisons and find better ways to rehabilitate violent criminals. The timing of the plan’s release is designed to sharpen Ms Harris’s message at a crucial moment. It should also give her an opportunity to tackle criticisms that during her previous career she did too little to challenge a criminal justice system that often discriminates against black and poor Americans. Her plan contains progressive proposals that contradict some of her earlier positions. For example as attorney-general of California Ms Harris did not push for independent investigations of fatal police shootings. Her plan would encourage states to do so. In an interview with the New York Times she defended her record, saying that political attitudes to criminal justice reform had changed a lot in recent years. Ms Harris’s fresh focus on criminal-justice reform is also designed to appeal to African-American voters, who so far seem to prefer Mr Biden to her. His reputation as a loyal deputy to the first black president, Barack Obama, helps with that. Yet if black voters’ enthusiasm for Mr Biden fades, Ms Harris would stand a reasonable hope of gaining it. On September 12th she will for the first time share the debate stage with all three candidates who are polling ahead of her. She is likely to say that she among them understands the need for criminal justice reform best. She will also try to return to her earlier pugnacious form. More important than any policy proposals is the perception of how the candidates would shape up in a duel against Mr Trump. A lingering suspicion that she might shape up well may be her strongest advantage.