BARRED FROM travelling beyond the confines of their over-crowded, ramshackle camps on a sliver of land in Bangladesh’s border district of Cox’s Bazar, about 1m Rohingya refugees have hitherto had to rely on mobile phones as virtually their sole link to the outside world. Yet on September 2nd the Bangladeshi government abruptly ordered all telecommunications companies to shut down mobile services and stop selling SIM cards in the camps. The companies have been given just seven days to take action. The surprise move was greeted with dismay and anger in the camps, and beyond. It will increase the Muslim Rohingyas’ sense of abandonment and despair, just two years after about 750,000 of them were mercilessly driven out of their villages in Rakhine state, just over the border in Myanmar—an operation condemned as a “genocide” by the United Nations. Responding to the mobile-phone shutdown, a UN official was quoted as saying that it would “further isolate and victimise the already persecuted people.” He worried that it would serve to push the Rohingyas “towards negative coping habits, be it crime, violence or extremism.”  The Bangladeshi authorities have tried to restrict mobile access in the camps before; they cited “security” concerns for this latest, more draconian crackdown. It reflects the deteriorating relationship between the refugees and the local population. That is not surprising given the sudden influx of hundreds of thousands of desperate, traumatised people into an already poor area. The Bangladeshi police allege that the Rohingyas have been “abusing” their mobile-phone access for criminal activities, including the trafficking of methamphetamine pills. Police have recently killed four Rohingyas during an investigation into the death of a local Bangladeshi official, Omar Faruk, thought to have been killed by Rohingya criminals. His murder provoked hundreds of incensed locals to block access to one of the camps on August 22nd and attack shops used by the refugees. The Bangladeshi government’s frustration with the refugees is mounting. It has, rightly, been praised for accepting the Rohingyas, but the mobile-phone ban is just one more bit of evidence that its patience is wearing very thin. In February the government announced that it would no longer take in any more Rohingyas. A particular source of irritation has been the utter failure of the repatriation schemes painfully negotiated with the Myanmar government. In the latest attempt, on August 22nd, not one of 3,450 nominated Rohingya refugees turned up for the buses laid on to take them back to Rakhine state. After decades of ethnic cleansing and economic marginalisation, still denied citizenship and any basic civil rights, they remain understandably fearful of how they will be treated by Myanmar’s army and police if they return. The Bangladeshi foreign minister, Abul Kalam Abdul Momen, has blamed the UN for not putting enough pressure on Myanmar to take the Rohingyas back. In an interview on September 4th with DW, a German broadcaster, he argued that this is an “international issue”, and that “it is time for others to come forward...We cannot afford to keep them for years.” He also raised the spectre, again, of dispatching the Rohingyas off to a cyclone-prone island in the Bay of Bengal, an option already dismissed by the UN and human-rights groups. In any case, that island would only have room for 100,000 people. Two years on from the genocide, compassion for the Rohingyas in Bangladesh seems to be running out. After a period of relative calm and stability since 2017, uncertainty and fear is returning to the camps.