UNEMPLOYED LONDONERS hoping to work for Gucci, an Italian fashion retailer, may be surprised by the skills required. As well as knowledge of luxury products, including accessories and leather goods, and industry trends, candidates to be a “brand ambassador” at the outlet in Harrods need something extra. Because the posh department store’s customers include rich visitors from the Gulf, you must also speak Arabic. Foreign languages remain a coveted skill in Britain, according to an analysis of data from Indeed, a recruitment website. Of the millions of jobs in Britain listed there, around one in 200 requires require foreign languages. German and French, the most desirable languages, feature in about 115 out of every 100,000 postings, over twice as often as Chinese, Italian or Spanish. Twenty-nine in 100,000 listings require Dutch; 20 call for Japanese, Polish or Russian. Despite the rise of translation software, people prefer to be served by fellow humans who can speak their mother tongue.  Different languages crop up more often in different trades. German is favoured in both sales and customer service, French in sales and education. A lot of mums and dads in London want their nannies to speak Russian. Rich folk seeking “lifestyle managers” are likely to want Arabic. Beauty consultants fluent in Mandarin are also in demand. According to Paweł Adrian, an economist at Indeed, the supply of foreign-language speakers is less seasonal than that for most workers, because many do not take time off for Christmas. Although demand for language skills remains robust, supply is being choked. The share of children in British secondary schools who learn a foreign language is at its lowest level in almost 20 years. Employers are turning to foreign native speakers to meet demand. In Britain nearly a quarter of clicks for foreign-language teachers, interpreters, translators and bilingual customer-service representatives come from elsewhere in the European Union, compared with just 3% of clicks for all jobs. Brexit also seems to be restricting this source of supply. Searches for jobs in Britain requiring European languages other than English have been on the decline. Since the 2016 referendum, those for positions demanding Polish have fallen by almost half.