THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT, the elected legislature of the European Union, relishes nothing more than a good grilling. So it will doubtless look forward to holding hearings for the team of commissioners revealed by the European Commission’s incoming president, Ursula von der Leyen, on September 10th. Successive reforms of EU treaties have increased the Parliament’s power over the appointment of commissioners, lending a veneer of democratic legitimacy to a process often criticised for its absence. Each member state nominates one candidate commissioner to serve a five-year term. (Since Ms von der Leyen is German, Germany nominates no further commissioner. Britain has not nominated, but may yet have to do so if the Brexit deadline is extended once again.) It is not uncommon for heads of governments to banish political rivals to Brussels in the hope that domestic voters will soon forget them. But first, the nominees must face interviews with the commission’s incoming president, who determines their new remit and can veto unsuitable candidates. The more powerful member states, or those that nominated political heavyweights, typically expect their candidate to receive an important portfolio.  Once these backroom deals have been concluded, commissioners-designate face their highest hurdle: a three-hour hearing at the European Parliament, where they can expect to be interrogated not only on the substance of their portfolio but also on any skeletons in their political closets. Conducted in the full glare of the media and watched by voters back home, a poor performance can sink the most carefully crafted of political careers. Long-serving parliamentarians may wistfully recall claiming the scalps of two candidates in 2004. The then Italian commissioner-designate, Rocco Buttiglione, whose proposed portfolio included human rights and equality, sparked outrage by disclosing that he considered homosexuality to be a sin, before blaming Europe’s low birth-rate on career-oriented women. European lawmakers also refused to back the Latvian nominee, Ingrida Udre, whose party was dogged by allegations of financial irregularities. The Italian and Latvian governments had little choice but to propose new candidates. The European Parliament votes on the whole proposed commission as a team. That means that a single objectionable candidate could sink the slate. To avoid this, the incoming president can either reshuffle the team’s portfolios, as José Manuel Barroso did in 2004 when the Hungarian commissioner-designate failed to convince the Parliament of his mastery of energy policy, or delicately ask the candidate’s government to name a less controversial choice. This emphasis on parliamentary scrutiny is not misplaced. Commissioners enjoy quasi-ministerial mandates, providing political direction to 32,000 European civil servants. The institution they lead is hugely powerful. The European Commission proposes new legislation—unlike the Parliament and the EU’s ministers. It also represents the EU in trade negotiations, draws up its budget, and polices member states’ compliance with its rulebook. Although this may be little consolation to the 26 politicos who will spend the next few weeks swotting for the toughest job interview of their lives, these parliamentary hearings provide a much-needed constitutional check on their sweeping powers. Dig deeperThe new top jobs in Europe, September 12th 2019