THE NATIONAL flag is flying from every house in the capital, Dili. Sirens wail as shiny black limousines whisk visiting dignitaries to their meetings. The country has been celebrating the 20th anniversary of the act of national heroism that brought it independence after 24 years of brutal Indonesian occupation: a referendum held under the auspices of the United Nations on August 30th, 1999. A remarkable 78.5% of voters back then defied intimidation before the poll and the certainty of Indonesian retaliation after it to risk independence. The reckoning came in an orgy of violence and arson from the Indonesian army and local militias it sponsored, in which between 1,400 and 2,600 people lost their lives or disappeared. Three long weeks later, an Australian-led international peacekeeping force arrived to restore order and begin the process of ushering Timor-Leste to statehood in 2002.  The highlight of the anniversary celebrations was a ceremony held in Tasitolu, just outside Dili. The joyous atmosphere was punctuated by speeches, music, dancing and fireworks. Medals were awarded to foreigners who had stood by the unborn country in its hour of need.The choreographer of all this was the man most closely identified with the liberation struggle: Xanana Gusmão. The leader of the armed resistance to the Indonesian invasion of 1975, Mr Gusmão spent time in a jail in Java before becoming president and then prime minister of the new republic until 2015. He wanted to impress on the new generation that independence was a joint international and internal effort. After the occupation, during which over 100,000 people died from starvation or violence, Timor-Leste had a baby boom. The population is now 1.3m, some 400,000 more than in 1999. The median age is just 19.8. Perhaps three-fifths of the population is too young to have any memory of Indonesian rule. Those who were there in 1999 tend to brag about it. The UN claims the referendum as one of its triumphs. It was indeed a remarkable achievement to have midwifed a free and fair vote. But the UN proved powerless to prevent the entirely predictable Indonesian reprisals, or to protect the civilian victims. Australia, similarly, is proud of its role in leading the intervention force. Its current prime minister, Scott Morrison, was in Dili for the festivities. But its record in Timor-Leste is scarred. It was revealed to have bugged the Timor-Leste government in 2004 during negotiations on how to demarcate the two countries’ maritime border, which traverses oil-and-gas fields that have been the young country’s economic lifeline. During his visit Mr Morrison signed an agreement giving Timor-Leste a higher share of the revenue. But he rejected suggestions that Australia owed several billion dollars for previous periods. Recently declassified American-government documents also cast Australia—and the rest of the West—in a bad light. They show that America and its allies were well aware of the extent of direct Indonesian military involvement in the Timorese militia, and in the plans for, in effect, the utter devastation of the country. Australia dragged its feet before intervening; and its forces did not cover the whole country. Indonesia, Timor-Leste's overbearing neighbour, has never paid a price for its crimes there. In 2005 a truth commission produced a 2,500-page report into the occupation and its aftermath, called “Chega!” (“Stop!” or “Enough!” in Portuguese, the language of the former colonial power). It is gathering dust on bookshelves in local libraries and government offices in Timor-Leste. No Indonesian general has faced any punishment. Anger in Timor-Leste with Indonesia remains largely dormant. But it flared on Facebook with the inauguration on August 29th of a new bridge in Dili, named after B.J. Habibie, a former Indonesian president who in 1999 granted Timor-Leste its referendum. Many argued that plenty of Timorese heroes were more deserving of recognition. But for Timor-Leste, too, the anniversary exposes some unpleasant truths. Many Timorese are worried by tensions in the leadership. The president, Francisco Guterres, popularly known as Lú-Olo, and the prime minister, Taur Matan Ruak, a military hero of the resistance, are said not to be on speaking terms. Some members of Fretilin, Lu-Olo’s party, snubbed the festivities. And Mr Gusmão is still pulling the strings; nothing much happens without his say-so. Many fret that the country has not made the most of independence, or of the international goodwill it enjoyed two decades ago. Despite the oil-and-gas dividend, about 40% of the population, are poor. Malnutrition is rife; the country’s children suffer one of the world’s highest rates of stunting. Faced with such challenges, the temptation is to ignore history and move on. But Hugo Fernandes, the director of Centro Nacional Chega!, an institution set up to monitor implementation of the report, says that "the past is more important than ever...The different narratives of history that exist in Timor-Leste need to be balanced out.” His centre, housed in Dili's former jail, has managed only recently to have Chega!’s findings included in the higher-education curriculum. Women’s organisations now run tours—for foreign visitors and young Timorese—around places where women were tortured and kept as sex slaves. CNC is now rolling out a pilot programme, in which high-school students interview their parents to collect history. "Let's close the book,” says Mr Fernandes, “but first read it page by page." Many pages are disappointments. But this has been a time to remember one to celebrate.