THE LIBERAL DEMOCRATS do not like Brexit. To clear up any lingering doubts, at their conference in Bournemouth a batch of their freshly elected MEPs strode on stage wearing “STOP BREXIT” T-shirts. Elsewhere, activists wearing blue berets spangled with EU stars wandered around hawking “Bollocks to Brexit” stickers. For those who had still not got the message, Jo Swinson, the party’s leader, unveiled a new policy: if the Lib Dems win the next election, they will revoke Britain’s Article 50 request to leave the EU “on day one”. While Labour has wobbled on Brexit, Britain’s third party has established itself as the party of Remain. The Lib Dems’ previous policy was to support a second referendum, which they have called for consistently since the first one, in 2016. Backing a second vote is still the policy in the event that the party fails to win a majority, something it has almost no chance of doing.  Not all are happy with the decision, which was overwhelmingly approved by conference delegates. Grandees grumbled. Sir Norman Lamb, a thoughtful MP and by Lib Dem standards a Eurosceptic, complained that simply revoking would annoy voters in the rural south-west, where the Lib Dems hope to gain seats, and his own constituency of North Norfolk. Brexit sliced through old electoral alliances. The Lib Dems have always relied on a curious mix of university towns and well-to-do suburbs (which tended to back Remain) and rural seats (where Leave was popular). Wavering Conservatives who voted Remain may think it a bit rum to ditch Brexit without another vote. And many of the Lib Dems’ most winnable seats are Tory ones (see chart). Yet the move will please the party’s growing base of Remainers, who powered the Lib Dems to second place—ahead of both the Conservatives and Labour—in the European election in May. Remainers prefer a straight cancellation of Brexit to a second referendum by two to one, according to a poll by Opinium. Only one in ten Leave voters backs a second referendum. Over 6m people signed a petition calling for the revocation of Article 50—about three times more than voted for the Lib Dems in the general election in 2017. Unless polls are monumentally wrong, the Lib Dems’ promise to revoke Article 50 could prove as relevant as a Sunday league footballer’s plan for an elaborate celebration should he score the winning goal in an FA Cup final. Its main benefit was to generate attention and cement the Lib Dems’ position as the most ardent of the Remain-supporting parties. On that basis it succeeded. But while the Lib Dems trot along at 20% in the polls, Ms Swinson will not be heading to Downing Street. Still, optimism abounded in Bournemouth. Normally the annual conference is a form of therapy for Lib Dems, jokes Tim Farron, who led the party in 2015-17 while it was on life support, with only 8% of the vote and eight MPs. Now its MPs are much more bombastic. Chuka Umunna, who defected from Labour (via Change UK) this summer, suggested that the party could win 200 MPs if it gets a 5% swing in the polls. When a party wins more than about a quarter of the vote, a deluge of seats follows, owing to the brutal logic of Britain’s first-past-the-post system. Yet local politics can trump national swings. Remainers are clumped together in cities and Scotland, while the Leave vote is scattered throughout the country more evenly, making it easier for Brexit-supporting parties to pick up seats. A modest political headwind could blow the Lib Dems badly off course. Of the party’s 18 seats, only one—Orkney and Shetland—is truly safe. Instead the Lib Dems are inches from both death and glory. The next election could easily result in their best-ever result, or another dreadful one. Whether in ignominy or in triumph, the Lib Dems may still find themselves kingmakers as the third- or fourth-largest party. Ms Swinson has ruled out any formal coalition or pact with either Labour or the Conservatives. Instead the party will vote on a case-by-case basis, says Sir Ed Davey, its finance spokesman. The Lib Dems have been burnt by partnership before. A tie-up with the Tories in 2010-15 resulted in their losing 90% of their MPs, after voters abandoned them. The breaking of popular manifesto promises, such as ending tuition fees, did the most damage. When it comes to Brexit, the Lib Dems will try not to make the same mistake twice.