“MARRIAGE STORY”, Noah Baumbach’s unsparing new comedy drama, is not about a marriage, but about an increasingly brutal divorce. It is not exactly a “story”, either, in the sense of having plot twists and obstacles and heroes and villains. Instead, it is a vividly illustrated catalogue of everything that can make splitting up a nightmarish experience. Hardly any films have examined divorce in such gruesome forensic detail, which is probably for the best. You would not want to go through something as painful as this too often. Scarlett Johansson and Adam Driver star as Nicole and Charlie Barber, a couple that is universally admired and adored. Charlie is an avant-garde theatre director who runs his own company in Brooklyn. Nicole is a former teen-movie starlet. They are blessed with good looks, talent and a cute young son, Henry (Azhy Robertson). In general, theirs is a picture-perfect Brooklyn boho life.  To put it another way, they are the kind of characters who often show up in Mr Baumbach’s work. Sticking to the maxim “write what you know”, he has chronicled life as an artsy, left-leaning, middle-class New Yorker in most of his films, including “The Squid and the Whale” (2005), “Greenberg” (2010), “While We’re Young” (2014) and “The Meyerowitz Stories” (2017). Given that he is a director himself, and that he has a son with his ex-wife, Jennifer Jason Leigh, an actress, “Marriage Story” would seem to be even more autobiographical than usual. When Charlie bemoans that getting married deprived him of invaluable opportunities for casual sex, and when Nicole complains that she started the relationship as the more famous of the two, but found herself being outshone by her husband, the viewer gets the feeling that Mr Baumbach did not need a huge amount of imagination to write those scenes. Even if you knew nothing about his background, though, “Marriage Story” would be horribly believable. Millennial hipsters that they are, Nicole and Charlie agree to sort everything out amiably without bringing in lawyers, but when Nicole moves to Los Angeles to film a science-fiction television series, a colleague advises her to retain Nora (Laura Dern), a divorce specialist who is as cheerful and brightly dressed as she is ruthless. Charlie is then forced to employ lawyers of his own, first a street fighter played by Ray Liotta, and then Alan Alda’s gentler, wearier veteran, whose hourly rates are still eye-wateringly high. The main issue these sharply drawn characters have to settle is whether Henry should live in Los Angeles or New York. But this one question is the touch-paper that sets off an explosion of long-suppressed resentments and disagreements. One quiet conversation builds to a shockingly vicious, yet strangely cathartic, argument—a slanging match which, although wholly verbal, compares to the most violent and bloody of cinematic fight scenes. It could well secure Oscar nominations for both Ms Johansson and Mr Driver, who handle extended monologues and fierce raw emotions with extraordinary skill. Almost as hurtful is the courtroom scene in which jokey discussions between Nicole and Charlie are quoted by their lawyers as evidence of their unfitness to be parents. What is ingenious about Mr Baumbach’s script is that it starts by convincing the audience that Nicole and Charlie belong together, and then it persuades the audience, scene by scene, that their entire relationship was a disaster. By the end, the viewer is not quite sure which extreme is true. Neither are they. If that sounds depressing, then so it should. In its depiction of two essentially reasonable people making each other miserable, while paying a fortune for the privilege, “Marriage Story” is a depressing film. It is not always exhausting in an artistically positive way, either. This being a Netflix production, and therefore made with the home-cinema market in mind, it keeps grinding on for well over two hours, much longer than Mr Baumbach’s other films. It may convey the repetitive, enervating aggravation of the divorce process a little too well. But “Marriage Story” is also funny, lightening the darkness with glittering one-liners and several farcical set-pieces. It could even be classified as an important public-information film. Anyone who sees it will think twice before getting a divorce, and think ten times before getting lawyers involved.