SUSPENDED ABOVE a lattice is a stony egg. Its shell is cracking, and a lurid yellow light gleams from within; a green gas seeps out. Above is a single word, “ALIEN”. Beneath is one of the best taglines in the history of film: “In space no one can hear you scream”. The artwork for “Alien” was powerfully evocative. It established a mood—that sickly green tinge would colour much of the franchise—but gave almost nothing away. The original trailer would likewise focus on the egg, with quick cuts of shaky footage from the film. It did not feature any big stars or any dialogue, only the sound of ticking and wails, which crescendoed into cacophonous screaming. So when “Alien” was first released, 40 years ago this summer, no one knew much about it.  As Alexandre Philippe’s new documentary, “Memory: The Origins of Alien”, shows, the project went through more changes than the Xenomorph beast at its heart. Dan O’Bannon’s script was first called “Memory”, then “Star Beast”. Walter Hill and David Giler rewrote the script, with Mr Hill attached to direct it before leaving the project to make “Southern Comfort” (1981). It was then that Ridley Scott, at the time something of a science-fiction sceptic, got his chance. The British director had only made one feature before—“The Duellists” (1977), a modest period drama—but he had an assured visual approach, honed on hundreds of television adverts. He emphasised the designs of H.R. Giger, a Swiss artist, who had created the uncanny biomechanical look of the film, including the design of the alien itself. Mr Scott’s rendering of the story was significant for three reasons. The first was its workaday ordinariness. The film presents a workers’ view of space: there are none of Stanley Kubrick’s robotic astronauts or George Lucas’s mythical knights. The operators of the Nostromo are ordinary men and women who experience neither awe nor wonder, but rather bitch about their bonuses and the quality of food on offer. It is this realism which grounds the horror in something more credible. (In the end, it emerges that the “company” has been exploiting them all along.) Second was the use of deferral. Just as the poster and the trailer give little away, there is a drowsy slowness to the first half-hour of the film as the crew awake from hypersleep to answer a distress call. It is only when they land on a wintery planet and discover a crashed vessel that a sense of unease creeps in. All of a sudden, a strange entity attaches itself to the face of Kane (John Hurt), the executive officer, in a terrifying jump scare. Back on the ship, Kane appears to recover; as the crew eats a last supper before returning to sleep, Kane chokes and convulses before an alien bursts from his chest, killing him. Shot with a lucid naturalism in the brightly lit ship canteen, the visceral scene is as shocking today as it was in 1979. Much like the shower episode in Alfred Hitchcock’s “Psycho” (1960), it is a bloody interruption of the ordinary. Taking a leaf out of Steven Spielberg’s “Jaws” (1975)—and indeed O’Bannon had pitched the project as “‘Jaws’ in space”—Mr Scott used shots of the full-sized alien sparingly. The creature only appears an hour into the film, first glimpsed as saliva-like goo and then as pharyngeal jaws that shoot out from its mouth. Once the alien is loose, the situation on board only gets worse: space becomes more restricted and time more pressing as the Xenomorph picks off the crew one by one until Ellen Ripley (Sigourney Weaver) is the last woman standing. Only then, in an important third development, does it becomes clear that Ripley was the hero from the outset. She was always the most sensible—she is keen to observe quarantine procedures, for example—but Captain Dallas (Tom Skerritt) is set up as the more conventional leader. There is a matter-of-factness to Ripley’s heroism: she is not a screaming damsel in distress (a role unfortunately fulfilled by Lambert), and her sexuality is largely irrelevant, even though the film is shot through with body horror. Ripley became a template for the “final girl” character in horror films thereafter. “Alien” would spawn three sequels, two spin-off films and two prequels. There would be comic books, novels and computer games as well as countless parodies and imitations. “Alien” broke new ground by combining two genres—science-fiction and horror—and avoiding the camp style typical of B-movies at the time. Four decades on, it is still terrifying.