BENJAMIN FRANKLIN once declared: “Nothing is certain but death and taxes.” Scrub the taxes. Otherwise legal purchases of goods and services, which are deliberately concealed from public authorities, and on which taxes are not paid, make up perhaps one-third of the global economy. The largest under-the-table economies (relative to the above-board bits) are in sub-Saharan Africa and Central Asia. But nowhere is immune. Because of their opaque nature, it is hard to put an exact figure on shadow economies. Researchers arrive at estimates by conducting surveys of the public, or by spotting discrepancies in macroeconomic data, such as the difference between national income and national expenditures. A study in 2018 found that the shadow economy in the European Union amounts to 17% of official GDP. Missing taxes mean less money to spend on health care, education and public safety. In many EU countries, the shadow economy is large enough to cover the annual budget deficit. Those losses probably cannot be recouped entirely: some tax-dodgers might quit rather than pay up. But how can they be limited? One way is to attack the payment instrument of choice: cash. Most informal transactions are made in cash because it is untraceable. Payments by bank transfer, debit card or credit card, however, are easier to track. One way, then, to shrink the shadow economy is to encourage electronic payments. Countries where card payments are more common tend to have smaller shadow economies (see chart).  In much of Europe, a shift away from cash is already under way. In 2015 the European Commission capped fees on debit and credit card transactions, boosting their appeal among retailers. Mobile payment apps, such as iDEAL in the Netherlands or Swish in Sweden, further encourage people to forgo coins and notes. In Sweden the number of retail cash transactions per person has fallen by 80% in the past ten years. In Norway cash makes up only 6% of purchases by value. But as electronic payments grow in popularity, governments must ensure that elderly and rural people are not left behind. Worries about safety must be taken seriously, too. Relying too heavily on digital payment systems leaves countries more vulnerable to cyberattacks. Hackers would be even less welcome than the taxman.