IN “FIRST BLOOD”, David Morrell’s action-thriller novel from 1972, John Rambo returns to America from Vietnam, where he fought in an elite Special Forces unit. Afflicted by post-traumatic stress disorder, he attacks the local police when they try to detain him and flees to the mountains. After a manhunt, in which officers and National Guardsmen die, Rambo hopes to meet an honourable end. His former captain shoots him in the head. The novel was adapted into a film in 1982, and its final scene had the hero (played by Sylvester Stallone) being put out of his misery. But when it was screened for test audiences, they hated it. The film-makers chose instead to write a stirring speech for Rambo, in which he recites a litany of complaints widely held among veterans of the war, before escaping the clutches of his pursuers. “Somebody wouldn’t let us win,” he shouts. “Then I come back to the world, and I see all those maggots at the airport, protesting me, spitting, calling me baby killer and all that vile crap.” It was a box-office hit, and Rambo promptly became a cultural phenomenon.  Just a few years earlier, films about the war in Vietnam had a more dejected feel. “The Deer Hunter” and “Coming Home” (1978) supported the troops but questioned the war itself by documenting the hardships faced by veterans returning to civilian life; with its original ending, “First Blood” would have fit neatly among them. Instead, Rambo’s rewritten speech reflected a new attitude towards recent American history. In 1980 Ronald Reagan had campaigned for the presidency on a platform of optimism, which required a renewal of America’s belief in its military might. “First Blood” chimed with Reagan conservatism, which emphasised American exceptionalism, the need for a muscular foreign policy and a loathing of big government. The subsequent “Rambo” films gave American audiences a chance to re-fight the Vietnam war and emerge with their national pride renewed. In “Rambo: First Blood Part II” (1985) the hero is recruited by his commander to rescue prisoners of war left behind by the American government. At the time of the film’s release, the idea that there were still American soldiers in Vietnam was a fringe theory—it was officially debunked by a Senate Select Committee in 1993—but the film treats it as fact. “Do we get to win this time?” Rambo asks before accepting the assignment. “This time, it’s up to you,” his commander responds. The sequel was a sensation, grossing $300m at the global box office. Its biggest fan resided in the White House. Towards the end of the Beirut hostage crisis in 1985, Reagan said that “after seeing ‘Rambo’ last night, I know what to do the next time this happens.” The character’s symbolic power extended to domestic policy, too. In a speech about tax breaks, Reagan began: “When I think of all the good people who’ve pleaded with the federal government for years to clean up our tax structure, I am reminded of a recent, very popular movie—and in the spirit of Rambo, let me tell you we’re going to win this time.” “Rambo III” followed in 1988, with the protagonist teaming up with the mujahideen in Afghanistan to save a friend kidnapped by Soviet forces. The most expensive film ever made at that time, it was a flop in America compared with its predecessors. Reagan was in his last year of office; the idea of out-and-out victory had become more complicated over the course of the cold war. Rambo’s on-screen alliance with rebel soldiers was a prelude to a new, murkier global era. The franchise took a two-decade hiatus. When Rambo returned in 2008, the year Barack Obama was elected president, the American right had new villains. Now middle-aged, in “Rambo” the hero is living a quiet life in Thailand when he is recruited by American missionaries to guide them to a war zone where Christian farmers are being slaughtered. They are captured and Rambo springs to life, murdering hundreds of Burmese soldiers in gruesome fashion. Although the film is set on foreign soil, Rambo’s mission echoed the sentiments of Republicans at home, some of who felt that American Christianity was under attack by the election of a president who they were convinced, despite evidence to the contrary, was neither Christian nor American. It grossed only $113m worldwide, yet its success was enough to justify one last instalment, “Rambo: Last Blood”, which was released on September 20th. This film again echoes Republican rhetoric, as Rambo crosses into Mexico to avenge the daughter of a family friend who is kidnapped, drugged and raped there. He lures the criminal back over the border to America so he can fight him on his own soil. Despite Mr Stallone’s recent insistence that the Rambo films never intended to make political statements, it is hard to ignore how his imagined war with Mexican villains dovetails with Donald Trump’s views on immigration. When Rambo kills them, he is enacting a fantasy shared by some of the president’s supporters. Compared with its influence in the 1980s, Rambo is a franchise in decline. “Last Blood” has been eviscerated by critics—its rating on Rotten Tomatoes, a review-aggregator site, is a paltry 28%—but it has matched the opening weekend ticket sales of the 2008 film and is on track to turn a solid profit. It indicates that, for some of the American public, the jingoism and military strength that Rambo symbolises continues to appeal.