FOR WEEKS the question has not been if the European Central Bank would ease policy on September 12th, but how. The euro area’s economy has been flagging and Mario Draghi, the ECB’s president, whose term ends on October 31st, had indicated that he would act to revive it. But with the bank’s policy rate already negative, it was clear he would have to rely on a combination of tools. Meanwhile Dutch and German hawks had insisted that they saw little need for large stimulus. In the event Mr Draghi won the hawks over, and unveiled several easing measures. The ECB cut the interest rate on bank reserves, money banks deposit with it, for the first time since 2016, by a tenth of a percentage point to -0.5%. It will restart its quantitative-easing (QE) scheme, which it drew to a close last year. From November it will buy €20bn-worth ($22bn) of bonds a month.  The bank also said it would ease the terms of its lending scheme to banks by lowering the interest rate and extending the maturity of its operations from two years to three. And, in order to mitigate the impact of subzero interest rates on banks’ profit margins, it will exempt some bank reserves from the negative deposit rate. Mr Draghi is probably best known for declaring that he would do “whatever it takes” to save the euro in 2012. The tagline for this package might be “however long it takes”. The ECB had previously pledged not to raise interest rates until mid-2020. It now says instead that rates will not go up until inflation “robustly” converges on the central bank’s target of close to, but below, 2% and until that is also reflected in underlying, or core, inflation (ie, excluding energy and food prices). In August both headline and core inflation were around 1%. Asset purchases will continue until the first rate increase is at hand. That may be a while: the ECB reckons inflation will still be only 1% next year, having just cut its forecast, and 1.5% in 2021. Investors had long expected a rate cut. The pace of asset purchases was less generous than many had pencilled in. But it allows the bank to continue buying bonds for longer before it hits its self-imposed limit on the share of a country’s sovereign bonds it can own. The open-endedness of the bank’s guidance seemed to be a welcome surprise, with the euro falling by around 0.5% against the dollar immediately after the announcement, though the effect unwound later in the day. The aim of all this is to perk up a flagging economy and the subpar inflation rate. An economic slowdown has proved more protracted than expected. Germany, the euro area’s biggest economy, is on the brink of recession. Figures released a few hours before the ECB’s decision showed that the zone’s industrial slump continued into the third quarter. Along with many economists, Mr Draghi believes that the euro zone needs looser fiscal policy to ginger it up, rather than relying solely on monetary means. With only a few weeks of his term left, Mr Draghi could afford to be blunt at the post-meeting press conference. The ECB would have less reason to resort to negative interest rates, he noted, if only governments spent more. Not all on the bank’s rate-setting body agreed with the decision to restart QE, but, he joked, they all thought that fiscal policy should be the euro zone’s main policy instrument. Asked if he was sending a message to governments, he simply said: “Yes.” But the first politician to respond was not European but American. President Donald Trump tweeted his consternation, accusing the ECB of waging a currency war and once again attacking his own country’s Federal Reserve. “They are trying, and succeeding, in depreciating the Euro against the VERY strong Dollar, hurting U.S. exports.... And the Fed sits, and sits, and sits.” Markets expect the Fed to cut rates again on September 18th—to the accompaniment of further presidential noises off.