FIFTY-FIVE YEARS since Lyndon Johnson, stooping on a porch in Inez, Martin County, Kentucky, declared a “national war on poverty”, America remains an outlier in international comparisons. When assessed on poverty—the share of families making less than 50% of the national median income after taxes and transfers—it is among the worst-performing in the OECD club of mostly rich countries. A special report in The Economist this week asks how one of the richest countries in the world can have so many poor people, and asks what can be done about it.  A survey this week revealed the extent of Germany’s economic angst. The purchasing-managers’ index, which gauges manufacturing activity, showed the sharpest decline since 2009. Many of Germany’s problems stem from supply disruptions at home. But Europe has suffered collateral damage in the trade war between America and China. So, with its largest economy languishing, and fears that trade headwinds might strengthen, economists are also lowering expectations for growth in the euro zone as a whole. Japan is also suffering from trade tensions. Its exports have fallen for nine months in a row. With investment also flat, the economy relies heavily on the consumer. Yet on October 1st Japan will raise the consumption tax to 10%, in an attempt to improve the government’s finances. This is the latest episode in Japan’s fraught 40-year history with the tax. The last time it was raised, in 2014, spending plummeted. This time, however, consumers have not been splurging in advance. The Indian government of Narendra Modi likes to pull surprises. Its latest is a steep reduction in corporate taxes. Businessfolk, morose of late as GDP growth has slowed, snapped out of their malaise. The main stockmarket index recorded its strongest two-day rise in a decade. The cut leaves Indian corporate taxation more in line with that of other countries. But many more reforms—eg, to land and labour laws—are needed if India is to attract supply chains shifting out of China. It was a good week for Britain’s opposition Labour Party to hold its annual conference. Boris Johnson was embroiled in another personal scandal and found to have broken the law when he suspended Parliament for five weeks. Labour did indeed profit from the prime minister’s humiliation. But its conference was an unedifying mix of radical policy, fights about Brexit and internecine warfare. Jeremy Corbyn, its prime-ministerial candidate, is among the least-liked politicians in recent history, more unpopular than even Michael Foot, a previous left-wing Labour leader.