WAS IT a nothing-burger after all? Many Democrats must have been anxiously asking themselves that question late on September 24th, after the White House abruptly promised to release a transcript of President Donald Trump’s controversial recent phone call with his Ukrainian counterpart, Volodymyr Zelensky. The Trump administration’s erstwhile refusal to make the transcript public, even as damning reports of its contents had leaked out, was a major reason why Nancy Pelosi, the Democratic Speaker of the House of Representatives, had announced the launching of an impeachment inquiry into Mr Trump earlier that day. What if—as some conservative commentators asked—the transcript turned out to be less damaging to Mr Trump than Mrs Pelosi had been led to expect? Had she been drawn into a trap?  The release of the transcript on September 25th suggests she had not been. Though an imperfect reconstruction of the phone conversation held on July 25th—not a verbatim account—it makes clear that Mr Trump repeatedly badgered Volodymyr Zelensky to investigate a debunked corruption allegation against one of his likeliest Democratic opponents next year, Joe Biden, concerning his son’s business interests in Ukraine. “There’s a lot of talk about Biden’s son, that Biden stopped the prosecution and a lot of people want to find out about that so whatever you can do with the attorney-general would be great,” Mr Trump is quoted as saying. “Biden went around bragging that he stopped the prosecution so if you can look into it…It sounds horrible to me.” Going further, the president urged Mr Zelensky to speak to his political crony and lawyer, Rudy Giuliani, who has admitted trying to dig dirt on the Bidens in Ukraine. He also suggested that William Barr, the attorney-general, would follow up with Mr Zelensky on the matter. Seemingly in response to Mr Zelensky’s raising of the possibility of acquiring American military gear, Mr Trump said “I would like you to do us a favour.” He then asked Mr Zelensky to investigate a rumour that Ukrainians, not pro-Trump Russians, were behind a 2016 cyber-hacking campaign designed to damage Hillary Clinton’s presidential bid. This was not a nothing-burger. Presidents are not supposed to urge foreign powers to help them settle political scores. On the face of it, at least two presidents have been impeached for less. Yet whether it is sufficiently shocking to have changed many people’s view of Mr Trump’s probity and fitness for the office he holds is unclear. Mr Trump had already admitted, in a series of increasingly intemperate outbursts, doing most of what the transcript contains. He just said there was nothing wrong with that, because fighting corruption abroad is a legitimate American concern; and because he says he did not seek to coerce Mr Zelensky to do as he asked. The fact that he froze a $400m package of military assistance to Ukraine only a week before the call has given some to doubt that last defence. Others maintain that this is immaterial to the main charge: Mr Trump did not need to have made the military aid contingent on his political demands for those demands to be wrong. Nonetheless, “no quid pro quo” has become a mantra of the president’s defenders, so it is notable that the transcript does not clearly show that to be wrong. The military package appears not to have been discussed on the leaders’ call. Whether or not indispensable to the impeachment case against Mr Trump, such details are about to consume America’s public debate. On September 26th, eyes will turn to Joseph Maguire, the acting director of National Intelligence, who will testify to the House Intelligence Committee. He has refused to pass on to Congress details of a whistleblower’s complaint that set off the controversy over Mr Trump’s dealings with Ukraine. Democrats, who say this obstruction violates the law, will urge him to turn it over—and explain why he has not already done so.