THE ARTERIES through which oil flows from Saudi Arabia, the world’s biggest exporter, to consumers across the world have always been the most tempting of targets. Sever them—the country’s long pipelines, pumping stations, storage tanks and great refineries—and it is not just the kingdom that bleeds, but the global economy. Others have tried, but failed. In 2006 Al-Qaeda’s suicide bombers staged an attack on Abqaiq, the world’s largest oil-processing facility, in eastern Saudi Arabia. They were stopped by guards. Now the Houthis, a Shia rebel group from the north of Yemen that is backed by Iran, have apparently succeeded in striking a humiliating blow against the Saudis and their Western backers. On September 14th drones and missiles launched by the group struck the Abqaiq plant and Khurais oil field, starting huge fires. Saudi Aramco, the kingdom’s state-owned oil company, said that it had suspended production of 5.7m barrels of crude oil. That is equivalent to roughly 60% of the kingdom’s output and 6% of the world’s oil production. Some analysts expect oil prices to spike if Saudi oil production is not restored soon. Aramco said it would give an update on the extent of the damage in about 48 hours, but a source told Reuters, a news agency, that repairs would take “weeks, not days”.  The attacks risk inflaming already tense relations within the Persian Gulf and between Iran and America. The first claims of responsibility for the attack came from the Houthis. The group has both means and motive. It is fighting a Saudi-led coalition in Yemen and has repeatedly used drones and ballistic missiles to hit airports, military bases and other targets in Saudi Arabia. Since last year, according to United Nations investigators, the Houthis have fielded drones with a range up to 1,500km (930 miles), enough to reach Abqaiq and Khurais. A chunk of debris from the latest attack resembles the fuselage of the Quds-1, a missile used by the Houthis. American officials, however, suggest that the attack originated not in Yemen but in Iraq, and was the work of an Iranian-backed militia. Mike Pompeo, the secretary of state, said that “Iran has now launched an unprecedented attack on the world’s energy supply.” The administration made a similar claim in May after drones hit a major pipeline that carries oil across the width of Saudi Arabia. So far, though, America has offered no evidence to support either assertion. For Saudi Arabia the origin of the attack is almost immaterial. It traces this attack, like previous ones, to its arch-nemesis Iran, which supplies money and weapons to the Houthis and other regional militias. The missiles used to hit Aramco’s facilities were almost certainly based on Iranian models. The Saudis have thus been enthusiastic backers of Donald Trump’s “maximum pressure” campaign, which was meant, among other things, to strong-arm Iran into ending such support. Last year the president withdrew from the 2015 nuclear deal between Iran and world powers, and imposed punishing sanctions on its economy. Iranian oil exports have shrivelled from 2.8m barrels a day to less than 1m. Iran has begun to hit back. It has breached some of the deal’s limits on its nuclear programme, sabotaged and seized oil tankers in the Persian Gulf, and detained Western visitors as hostages. Lately, though, Mr Trump has flirted with a less confrontational approach. He offered to meet Iran’s president, Hassan Rouhani, for talks; there was idle chatter about a meeting on the sidelines of the UN general assembly later this month, though objections from Iranian hardliners make that unlikely. More confusingly, Mr Trump seems to back a French proposal to offer Iran a $15bn “credit line” that would help it cope with his own oil sanctions. Maximum pressure has become maximally puzzling. The Aramco attack may yet swing Mr Trump back to his earlier, hawkish stance, particularly if it drives up oil prices. But his options are limited. Iran’s battered economy has few targets left to sanction. A few hawks in Washington, like Lindsey Graham, a Republican senator, have talked of a military response. Mr Trump ordered air strikes on Iran in June, after it shot down an American drone, but cancelled them at the last minute after deciding they were disproportionate. A president reluctant to entangle America in military conflict in the Middle East may find his choices are to do just that—or do nothing. If he opts for the latter, that will deepen a sense of growing unease in Riyadh. Frequent Houthi attacks have revealed troubling gaps in Saudi air defences, none more so than this weekend’s. Saudi Arabia’s closest ally, the United Arab Emirates (UAE), is withdrawing most of its troops from Yemen, where the two have profound disagreements over tactics and strategy in a war that has reached a stalemate. The UAE has also taken a less hostile stance toward Iran, pointedly refusing to blame it for sabotaging four tankers in Emirati waters. Moreover, the attacks come at a sensitive time for the oil markets in general and for Aramco in particular, which is preparing to list a portion of its shares in what is expected to be the largest initial public offering ever. In preparation for its listing, Saudi Arabia has been keen to show both that it can support the oil price and that it can produce crude reliably, despite mounting security threats. Recent events reveal the limits of its ability to do either. The oil price has been particularly volatile in the past year. It has alternately jumped and slid as American sanctions on Venezuelan and Iranian oil stoked fears that demand might exceed supply and anxiety about slowing economic growth fuelled concerns of sinking demand. Throughout Saudi Arabia has led efforts to stabilise prices. In December the Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) and other allies, including Russia, announced that they would cut production by 1.2m barrels a day. Saudi Arabia has regularly curbed output by more than it promised, in an effort to support the oil price as other OPEC members, such as Iraq and Nigeria, declined to depress production. These efforts have undoubtedly kept the oil price from plunging as far as it might have. Even so the price of Brent crude on September 13th, before the weekend’s attacks, was $60, nearly 20% below the level in late April. For oil markets, the crucial questions now are how quickly Saudi Arabia can resume production and whether the attacks spur a broader military confrontation. The risks of the latter are growing. For months officials in the Gulf have warned that Saudi Arabia would eventually retaliate against Iran for the constant drone and missile attacks from Yemen. Until now it has been content to let Mr Trump put pressure on Iran. If, however, Saudi Arabia feels that Mr Trump cannot be relied on to ensure its security, then Mohammad bin Salman, the brash and reckless Saudi crown prince, may feel compelled to act on his own.