FOR SOME Americans, such as Vice-President Mike Pence, promoting religious liberty at home and opposing religious persecution round the world are parts of a single, inter-connected struggle. About a month ago, Mr Pence told cheering fellow conservatives that “freedom of religion is under attack in our country” and cited the criticism endured by his wife Karen for teaching at a Christian school where openly gay people are unwelcome. In other contexts, he has insisted that opposing religious oppression everywhere must be central to American diplomacy. Others would say that the contentious issues bunched under “religious freedom” in domestic American debates (the role of contraception in employer-funded health plans, religiously inspired teaching in schools, and so on) are of a different order to the dreadful persecution that takes place in many parts of the world. On the first cluster of issues, reasonable folk might disagree; over the second, no decent person could fail to be horrified, and opposing such horrors (from blasphemy trials to re-education camps) must surely be a common American concern.  In practice, though, even the global defence of freedom of conscience has become increasingly politicised. That shows up in the make-up of the United States Commission on International Religious Freedom (USCIRF), a bipartisan agency constituted by Congress and the White House that is tasked to provide advice on persecution and how best to oppose it. Commissioners have tended to be distinguished academics or religious figures whose personal authority somewhat transcended politics. But things are more contentious now. The panel includes the former and current presidents of the Family Research Council, a conservative lobby group which declares that homosexuality is “harmful to those who engage in it” and denounces same-sex nuptials as a “radical redefinition and falsification of marriage”. In addition to those Republican stalwarts (respectively Gary Bauer and Tony Perkins), there are Democratic nominees. The USCIRF’s rotating chairmanship is now held by Tenzin Dorjee, a scholar of Tibet and Tibetan Buddhism who was appointed to the panel by Nancy Pelosi, the Democratic Speaker of the House. Another Democratic choice is Gayle Manchin, an educator and former First Lady of West Virginia, who is vice-chair of the panel. Diverse as they are, these people hold some things in common, and these include a healthy disrespect for the persecution of believers in communist and former communist lands. The USCIRF’s annual report, published this week, was harsher than ever in its denunciation of China, for its persecution of Muslims, Buddhists, Christians and other believers. In the north-west of China, the report noted, Muslims were under constant surveillance, and subject for example to intrusive blood sampling, the confiscation of phones and a ban on sending children to the mosque. “Even worse, the Chinese government has ripped entire families apart, detaining between 800,000 and 2m adults in concentration camps and relegated some of their children to orphanages.” As Mr Bauer put it, in any rating of severe religious oppressors, “China would be in a category all by itself...they are an equal opportunity persecutor. They go after anybody, any sect that might compete with the communist, atheistic government of China.” The USCIRF commended the State Department for keeping China, along with nine other countries, on its list of “countries of particular concern” or egregious persecutors and it urged that six other countries, including Russia, be added to the list. Russia has come under fire recently for its harsh persecution of Jehovah’s Witnesses, scores of whom have been arrested, charged with “extremism” and in some cases tortured. Some pietistic forms of Islam, not known to advocate or practise violence, have also been proscribed in Russia. The USCIRF urged the administration to consider the possibility of sanctions against Saudi Arabia after 37 people, mostly from the Shia Muslim minority, were executed. Saudi Arabia features on every list of egregious persecutors but successive American administrations granted waivers that preclude punitive measures against the kingdom. On April 26th Mr Dorjee said the State Department must stop “giving a free pass” to the Saudis. However a Republican nominee to the commission, Johnnie Moore, insisted on April 29th that all was not ill in Saudi Arabia. “It’s a kingdom where there are lots of different things happening, some things that are the worst in the world, and [by] the same token there is a glimmer of light,” said Mr Moore, a member of group of evangelicals who support President Donald Trump. In a gesture that some might see as mildly pro-Saudi, the Commission’s report proposed that the Houthis (enemies of the Saudi-led coalition fighting a cruel war in Yemen) be added to a list of “entities of particular concern”, in other words, non-state actors which practise religious persecution. In a world where authoritarian regimes (and other cruel zealots such as lynch mobs and terrorists) seem ever more confident, many might wonder how much difference to anything can be made by manoeuvres on the inside track of American politics and diplomacy. For example, whatever anyone proposes, it seems very unlikely that America will ever impose sanctions against its Saudi allies because of religious persecution. But the fact that America has elaborate machinery for the monitoring and advocacy of religious freedom, both by the USCIRF and the State Department, does serve a purpose. Whatever their ideological antecedents, and however little sympathy they might have for Islam, the staunch Republican conservatives who sit on the USCIRF are obliged ex officio to stand up for oppressed Muslims in China and, say, Myanmar; that is more than many Muslim governments do. As regards Russia, many American conservatives and evangelicals might be somewhat tempted by hints coming from high places in Moscow, including the state-guided media, that there should be a common Russian-American front, grouping traditionalists in both countries, against sexual and reproductive freedom, and in support of oppressed Christians in the Middle East. But through the USCIRF and its research, American non-conformists are brought face to face with the fact that Russia’s present rulers are no friends of dissident Christian sects or idiosyncratic religious groups. That sets sensible limits to any love affair between American and Russian religious conservatives.