SAM GOLD, an acclaimed theatre director, prefers to work with living writers. “I love the birthing process,” he told Prospero in 2016. “I feel more connected to a play if I have the playwright with me and we’re making it together.” His collaborations with mostly young American playwrights regularly garner acclaim and some trophies. His production of “Fun Home”, a musical based on Alison Bechdel’s graphic memoir, earned him a Tony in 2016. Yet there is one writer for whom Mr Gold is willing to make a regular exception: William Shakespeare. The plan, Mr Gold said recently, is to direct all of Shakespeare’s tragedies. He is off to an impressive start. His intimate productions of “Othello” in 2016 (reviewed here) and “Hamlet” in 2017 were some of the most highly sought-after tickets off Broadway. Now his “King Lear” is on Broadway, with the masterful Glenda Jackson in the role of the addled and ill-fated monarch.  For a director whose work tends to mine the drama of subtext—the subtle gaps between what people say and what they mean; the awkward silences that yawn between utterances—Shakespeare seems an abrupt change of pace. This, of course, is the point. “I’ve been really hungry for these much more muscular pieces of writing, which isn’t the mode people write in right now,” he observes. While the new plays he directs are often “little, beautiful nuggets”, the Bard has written “the deepest, most bottomless dramas we have in our culture.” People need a chance “to endure drama on this scale,” he says. “And these plays are very cathartic.” Mr Gold’s vision for Lear certainly heightens opportunities for catharsis. In this production, the thin-skinned and raving king—who confuses flattery for fidelity, obsequiousness for respect—presides over an almost garishly golden court. His sycophantic daughters are decked with nouveau-riche bling. Perhaps the only thing missing is a Twitter account. Mr Gold thinks that it is satisfying to see “a mad autocrat run naked through a storm screaming at the gods.” But his intentions are more serious. “The play is about a corrupt leader who demands loyalty, and when that loyalty is denied him he goes crazy and the whole world falls apart. I think we need to see that.” The show has received mixed reviews for its uneven performances and a few questionable decisions. An original score by Philip Glass, for example, deserves its own concert; here it awkwardly competes with the music of the play’s language. Yet Ms Jackson is riveting. Mr Gold is thoughtful about having a woman in the title role. He notes that the play is filled with the language of male entitlement, “but when a man says it, you don’t even think about it, you’re just so used to it.” When a woman plays a power-mad monarch who still believes he is more “sinned against than sinning”, the experience is subtly disconcerting. “Lear is about patriarchy,” says Mr Gold. “This is what corrupt male power looks like.” Theatre producers regularly complain about dwindling audiences, particularly now that so much entertainment is on demand at home. The running time of new plays has been shrinking, and rising playwrights are regularly poached for television. It is heartening, then, that there is still room on Broadway for a challenging play that lasts over three hours and ends with catastrophe. Mr Gold is not surprised. “Poetry is essential to the way we process humanity and culture,” he says. The more digitised and atomised our lives become, “the more we need the theatre”. “King Lear” is showing at the Cort Theatre until July 7th