DEMOCRATIC CANDIDATES performed so well in last year’s mid-term elections that pundits dubbed the cycle a “big blue wave”. By another measure, it was more akin to a 100-year flood. The final count of ballots reveals that, at 50.3%, a higher share of America’s eligible voters turned out to vote than for any mid-term election since 1914. New data from the US Census Bureau shows that this was driven especially by young people, Hispanics, and those with a college degree. These are groups that have been particularly outraged by President Donald Trump. If their political engagement continues, it could affect the outcome of the presidential election next year. Mid-term elections have tended to be affairs for the politically-engaged. It requires unusual attention to politics to go out and vote for a political representative you may not have seen much of. Presidential elections, on the other hand, suck up media attention and advertising dollars from up to two years before Election Day. Over the past century, the average turnout for mid-terms has been 43%—16 percentage points lower than average turnout in presidential contests. The voters who typically cast ballots in mid-term elections have tended to be older, whiter, and better-educated than those that vote for president. This demographic portrait held true in 2018, but with some notable changes.  Analysis by Michael McDonald, a political scientist, of the 2018 Current Population Survey (CPS), a nationwide poll conducted by the US Census Bureau in the November following each even-year election, shows that the increase in voter turnout was large for every major demographic group. But a few groups stood out. Turnout among Americans between the ages of 18 and 29, Hispanics and those who began or completed a college degree increased 13, 16 and 13 percentage points since the last mid-terms in 2014. Whites and Americans without a college degree—groups that tend to be more loyal than not to Mr Trump—increased their turnout by 11 and 7 percentage points. Young women turned out in particularly high numbers. This is unsurprising given that the past two years have been marked by a series of women’s campaigns including the Women’s March and #MeToo movement. Among young voters, 33% of women reported voting last year, compared to 27% of men. That constitutes an increase of 16 and 13 percentage points compared to 2014 levels. Mid-term elections are often referred to as referendums on the party in power. But 2018’s referendum was most unusual. Not only was turnout exceptionally high; voters also swung left in percentages not seen since 1974. According to Catalist, a data company, compared to the 2014 election, the 18-29 age group was 24 points more Democratic; college-educated voters swung 27 points to the left while Hispanics moved 16 points. In other words, the voters that were more likely to turn out in higher numbers were also among the most likely to switch from Republican to Democratic. This is bad news for Mr Trump’s 2020 campaign. If these voters stay engaged until next November the president will face a big hurdle to his re-election. Meanwhile, longer term demographic changes give Democrats more cause for cheer: America is growing younger, darker-skinned and better educated.