DISNEY FILMS are full of tearjerking moments. Many will remember the haunting sound of a buckshot ringing through the forest in “Bambi” (1942), or the sight of Simba crawling under his dead father’s limp paw in “The Lion King” (1994). Such scenes play on children’s fears of losing a parent. Yet for parents themselves, it is a particular part of “Dumbo” (1941) that is hardest to watch. In the classic animated film—newly remade by Tim Burton—Dumbo, a young circus elephant, is shunned by his herd on account of his comically large ears. When his mother tries to defend him from his human tormentors, she is locked up. Dumbo’s luck goes from bad to worse when he brings the big-top down in a stunt gone awry and is rebranded as a clown, a matter of deepest shame for the troupe’s pachyderms. At his lowest ebb, Dumbo goes to visit his mother. She strokes him with her trunk through the bars of the cell, then scoops him up and cradles him to the strains of a lullaby (cutaway shots show other circus animals nuzzling up to their mothers). It is a devastating scene that speaks to every parent’s fears of being separated from a child, and it owes much of its haunting power to Frank Churchill’s song (with lyrics by Ned Washington), “Baby Mine”. Churchill is an undersung figure in the Disney story. A former bar-circuit pianist and silent-movie musician, he was hired by the studio in 1931 and quickly wrote a smash-hit song, “Who’s Afraid of the Big Bad Wolf?”, which struck a chord with Depression-era audiences in 1933. He went on to write many of Disney’s best-loved early tunes, from “Heigh-Ho” and “Some Day My Prince Will Come” (“Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs”) to “Love Is a Song” (“Bambi”). But his career was tragically short. An alcoholic who suffered from depression, Churchill died from a self-inflicted gunshot wound while sitting at his piano in his home near Castaic, California, in 1941. “Churchill’s influence on Disney is immense,” says James Bohn, a composer and author of “Music in Disney’s Animated Features” (2017). “I would say he was the second most important person to work at the studios after Walt himself. He wrote their first hit song, ‘Who’s Afraid of the Big Bad Wolf?’, named the catchiest song of 1933 by Time magazine. That taught Disney the potential for songs to promote a motion picture. It also taught him how songs can effectively be integrated into a story.” With “Baby Mine” Churchill helps give “Dumbo” an emotional weight that counterbalances the film’s more exuberant flights of fancy. It’s a “quintessential lullaby”, says Mr Bohn, a touchingly simple ode to the bond between a mother and her child. It matches the rich voice of Betty Noyes (who dubbed Debbie Reynolds’s vocals for “Singin’ in the Rain”) with the dreamy exaltations of a female choir: “rest your head close to my heart,” they croon, “never to part, baby of mine.” Paired with the visual poetry of the scene, it makes for a poignant moment. The song was nominated for an Oscar in 1942. It would have prompted a particular frisson of anxiety for American filmgoers in the 1940s. “Dumbo” was released in October 1941, as America became embroiled in the second world war; the country would officially enter the fray only two months later, after the attack on Pearl Harbour. Many people seeing the film for the first time would have thought of relatives who might be drafted. The modern viewer’s thoughts, meanwhile, might turn to the children forcibly separated from their parents at the American border. Yet Mr Burton’s “Dumbo” remake manages to both over- and under-play “Baby Mine”. In the promotional campaign for the film, Disney showcased two versions of the song: a twinkly, stirring rendition by Aurora, a Norwegian singer-songwriter, and a doo-wop iteration by Arcade Fire, a group of Canadian indie-rockers. The version that appears in the movie itself is curiously muted, performed on a ukulele by a member of the circus troupe not when Dumbo is separated from his mother, but when they are reunited. It falls flat and, combined with other half-hearted nods towards the musical numbers in the original, makes you wonder why Disney didn’t just cut the songs from this live-action adaptation altogether. This is one of many opportunities missed by the film-makers. The original “Dumbo” was a product of its time: there is a character called Jim Crow, voiced by a white actor parodying African-American vernacular; a scene featuring an intoxicated minor that has since become a staple of acid cinema (“Pink Elephants on Parade”), and some unionising clowns that echo the Disney workers’ strike that disrupted the film’s production. But at the heart of it all was a simple story, gracefully told—and nowhere is that depth of feeling more apparent than in “Baby Mine”.