THE ENERGY generated by the #MeToo movement has revived a much older crusade: the push to ratify the Equal Rights Amendment. The full text of the ERA, which was passed in a storm of controversy in the 1970s, seems unprovocative today: “Equality of rights under the law shall not be denied or abridged by the United States or by any state on account of sex”. Yet a renewed push to ratify the amendment looks likely to spark fresh discord. The ERA was first proposed by Alice Paul, a leader of the campaign for women’s suffrage, in 1923. With overwhelming majorities in the House and Senate—and support from President Richard Nixon—Congress passed the ERA in 1972. When the measure went to the states (the constitution says that three-fourths must ratify an amendment), its prospects looked good. Within five years, 35 of the required 38 states had signed up. Then nothing happened. The original seven-year deadline for ratification that Congress had placed in the preamble of the amendment was extended to 1982—and still, the remaining three states failed to ratify it.  Nearly a century after its introduction, campaigners think they are on the verge of a breakthrough. On March 27th, a group of 22 Senate Democrats, including six presidential hopefuls, reintroduced the ERA in the upper chamber. They have been encouraged by the fact that in 2017 and 2018 Nevada and Illinois became the 36th and 37th states to ratify. Campaigners across the country are taking bets on which state might be the next, and last. Of the 13 states that have not ratified the amendment, many activists see Virginia as the ERA’s best hope. The amendment had previously passed the state Senate, but floundered in the House of Delegates, where it failed in committee again this January. When Democrats proposed a change to House rules to bring the resolution to the floor in February, the measure failed by one vote. Eleanor Smeal, a former president of the National Organisation for Women and a leader of the campaign to pass the ERA in the 1970s and 80s, says proponents of the amendment should not be disappointed. If Democrats win a majority of seats in Virginia’s House elections in November, Mrs Smeal says, they will have the votes. ERA campaigners cherish similar hopes in Arizona and North Carolina. If the ERA can clear the 38-state hurdle, what will happen next? In a recent op-ed for the Washington Post, Senators Ben Cardin and Lisa Murkowski, a Democrat and a Republican, argued that the 1982 deadline was arbitrary, and that Congress “handcuffed itself” by including it in the amendment’s introduction. They have introduced a bill that would remove the deadline, theoretically clearing the way for ratification of the ERA upon passage by a final state. But some states have come to regret their ratification. In the 1970s—thanks in large part to an anti-ERA campaign led by Phyllis Schlafly, a firebrand critic of feminism—five states voted to rescind their approval. It is not clear that states have the authority to rescind ratification of a pending amendment. The question made it to the Supreme Court in 1982 with National Organisation for Women v Idaho, which concerned one of those five states, but as the 10-year deadline for ratification had just expired, the court dismissed the case as unsettled. How would today’s judiciary handle such squabbles? If campaigners call for the ERA’s adoption upon ratification by a 38th state, those five states may mount a legal challenge. “No one really knows how to handle that situation,” says David Strauss, a constitutional law professor at the University of Chicago. “It’s all a great unknown and it’s not clear the Supreme Court would touch that”. The question that looms largest over this latest push is whether America still needs the amendment at all. Around half of the states already have some version of the Equal Rights Amendment written into their constitutions. Women in the rest of the country may stand to benefit from a federal standard. However, the legal landscape changed significantly in recent decades. As a lawyer arguing in front of the Supreme Court in the 1970s, Ruth Bader Ginsburg helped broaden the scope of the 14th Amendment’s equal-protection clause to include discrimination on the basis of sex. Women can now attend what were once all-male military institutes and may not be struck from juries on the basis of their sex, for example. The ERA may not add much to this list. Activist groups on both sides of the ERA debate see larger-stakes issues on the horizon. Many pro-life groups view the amendment as a pernicious attempt by the left to entrench more permissive abortion requirements in the constitution. They quote Jerrold Nadler, a congressman from New York, who in June 2018 pitched the ERA as a bulwark against the possible erosion of Roe v Wade, the 1973 ruling recognising a woman’s right to access abortion in the first trimester. “What the Supreme Court giveth, the Supreme Court can taketh away”, he said. That is true. But there is little reason to believe that the ERA, by itself, would stand in for Roe and save abortion rights should the Supreme Court one day dispatch the long-standing precedent. There are, however, other reproductive-rights concerns for which the ERA may provide a constitutional hook in litigation. For example, some ask whether paying childbirth expenses under Medicaid obliges the government to provide funds for medically necessary abortions as well. Another concern involves access to contraceptive care under the Affordable Care Act, which the Supreme Court decided in Burwell v Hobby Lobby could be denied to women by employers with religious objections. Whatever the legal implications, women’s rights activists and legal scholars seem to agree that ratifying the ERA would have symbolic and cultural value. Justice Ginsburg is sceptical that the amendment would make a huge difference to the lives of American women. But she has said that she “would like to be able to take out my pocket constitution and say that the equal citizenship stature of men and women is a fundamental tenet of our society, like free speech”.