THERE WAS once a time when races on the track represented the pinnacle of long-distance running. Few rankings of history’s greatest athletes include any marathon specialists from before 1970. By contrast Paavo Nurmi and Emil Zatopek, who dominated the 5,000-metres and 10,000-metres track events in the 1920s and 1950s respectively, are revered by athletics aficionados. The 26.2-mile (42.2km) road race, which was only invented in 1896 for the first modern Olympics, was still something of a second-class event in the middle of the 20th century. At the 1952 games Zatopek, who had just won the 5,000-metres and 10,000-metres but had never run a marathon before, entered the race and triumphed by more than two minutes. When recalling America’s “running boom” of the 1970s—a surge of interest in jogging that included President Jimmy Carter taking to the tarmac—Runner’s World noted that “road running up to the 1960s was an unfashionable add-on to track”. How times have changed. Last month the International Association of Athletics Federations (IAAF) announced that it was dropping the 5,000-metres race from its schedule for the Diamond League, its high-profile global tour of 14 meets each year. The event takes too long (about 13 minutes) for the 90-minute broadcast package that the IAAF desires, a constraint that had already led to the exclusion of the 10,000-metres format. Individual Diamond League hosts will be free to organise additional races over these distances if they choose, but the only guaranteed prize money for the events will now be available at the World Championships and Olympics. A lengthy broadcast time, however, is not the biggest problem facing long-distance track races. The real threat to their survival is a lack of star competitors. The world records for the women’s 5,000-metres, the men’s 5,000-metres and the men’s 10,000-metres have all stood for at least a decade. The holders of those records, Tirunesh Dibaba and Kenenisa Bekele respectively, are still competing at an elite level—but they have turned their attention almost exclusively to the marathon. Men’s track events have suffered particularly badly from such career moves: Paul Tergat, Haile Gebrselassie, Sir Mo Farah and the current world-record holder Eliud Kipchoge have all given up shorter races to pursue marathon glory. The IAAF’s decision to cut the track events from its schedule was surely influenced by this decline in talent, and will only contribute further to the downward spiral. What explains the exodus of elite runners from the track to the road? The obvious answer is money. Marathons are by far the most lucrative option for long-distance athletes. The total purse for a single track event over the course of a Diamond League season is $250,000, and competitors rarely take home more than $100,000 a year from these meets. Last year’s London Marathon, by contrast, offered $55,000 for winning a single race, with additional bonuses for meeting world-class time standards. Top runners typically enter only two races per year, but they also receive appearance fees that can exceed $100,000. Many of them serve as sponsors for the likes of Nike and Adidas, and compete for additional six-figure bonuses in the annual World Marathon Majors series. Thanks to these incentives, both the men’s and women’s world records have been bettered within the last two years. Indeed, the men’s mark has improved six times since Mr Bekele established the current 5,000-metre standard in 2004. The marathon’s financial supremacy over its shorter cousins is not a reflection of its general appeal. Among amateur runners the 5,000-metres, or “5K”, is by far the most popular format, in part because it requires much less training. Of the 18m Americans who registered for a road race last year, nearly half entered a 5K event, compared with less than 3% who attempted the marathon. Instead, the reason that 26.2-mile format has held on to sponsors and stars is that it offers a much greater spectacle. A 5K can be held in a neighbourhood park; a marathon with a field of 40,000 runners, such as those in London and New York, requires closing roads across half a city. Few sports fans could pick Mr Kipchoge out of a crowd, but the magnitude of his races draws the attention that sponsors crave. Many city marathons have become annual fixtures to rival those of the majors in golf and tennis. If proponents of the shorter formats—including Mr Gebrselassie, who has called the IAAF’s decision “tragic and unfair”—want to prevent them from falling into complete obscurity, they will need to make them as commercially attractive as the city marathons. They could follow the example set by the World Cross Country (XC) Championships, a 10,000-metre event. After years of dwindling interest, the organisers for this year’s race, held on March 30th in Aarhus, Denmark, set an unusually hilly route—including a short segment across the roof of an archaeology museum and a detour through a huge tent, where beer-fueled fans (supping beverages from Mikkeller microbrewery, the sponsor) urged on the competitors. Another model is the Night of the 10,000 PB’s, held annually since 2013 at London’s Hampstead Heath. The elite track meet has incorporated the British Championships since 2014 and served as trials for the 2016 Rio Olympics and 2017 World Championships. Like the XC Championships in Aarhus, it is an all-day event, with everything from DJs to fire dancers to keep the crowd engaged. Whether these entertaining fan experiences can become lucrative enough to tempt the likes of Messrs Bekele, Kipchoge and Farah back to shorter races is uncertain. But there is a deep pool of distance-running talent and millions of amateurs looking for inspiration. Despite a rough decade for the discipline, some creative thinking from organisers ought to give it a brighter future.