JAKARTA IS bursting at the seams. Around 10m people squeeze into Indonesia’s chaotic capital, with another 20m in the surrounding metropolitan area. Rapid urbanisation and a woeful lack of buses and trains have left the roads heavily jammed. In 2016, a survey found that the city had the worst traffic in the world. Businesspeople, fed up with spending an hour in a taxi getting to a meeting just a few blocks away, speak over Skype instead. Some policemen have started a side line in selling motorcade escorts to them. A new underground service, decades in the making, already feels jam-packed. The city’s growth has hurt the environment, too. Developers have concreted over the city’s green bits and floodplains in their haste to erect ever-taller, and heavier, office blocks; discarded plastic clogs up the rivers. As a result, floods have become more frequent and deadly. Jakarta is the world’s fastest-sinking urban area. Some neighbourhoods are dropping at a rate of 25cm per year, and researchers think that almost all of north Jakarta could be submerged in 30 years. Rising sea levels is one contributory factor. Another is that only one third of residents have access to piped water, so the rest bore holes in the ground to tap the natural reservoir beneath the city.  It is partly for these reasons that Joko Widodo, Indonesia’s president, known as Jokowi, wants to move the capital. On April 29th, after a cabinet meeting on the topic, Bambang Brodjonegoro, the head of the National Development Planning Agency, announced the government’s plans. A precise site for the new capital has not been chosen, but it will not be on Java, the island where Jakarta is located. The most likely destination is Palangkaraya, the capital of the province of Central Kalimantan, part of the Indonesian portion of Borneo (an orangutan sanctuary on the outskirts of the city is pictured above right). Not all branches of government will up sticks. Those most-closely tied to Indonesia's economy, like the central bank, will stay put. The choice of destination highlights Jokowi’s other reason for the move: he wants to reduce regional income inequalities. Indonesia is an archipelago of 13,000 or so islands, but it is dominated by Java, which accounts for about 58% of GDP and about the same share of the population. Moving the capital to Borneo would not only ease Jakarta’s overcrowding, but also help reduce regional income gaps. Average wages are about 40% lower in Central Kalimantan than in the capital. Borneo could benefit in other ways. Its dense and luscious rainforests have long suffered at the hands of natural-resource firms, like those involved in palm oil and coal mining, whose razing of trees and polluting of rivers goes largely unpunished. Getting away with these environmental sins is made easier by the island’s sparse population and remoteness from policymakers. If it becomes home to legions of government officials, politicians and journalists, the argument goes, the industry’s most nefarious deeds will become harder to ignore. Then again, locals have already expressed fears that building the new capital, however modest in size, will itself devour more of that luscious rainforest.  The idea of shifting the capital is not new. It was originally proposed by Sukarno, Indonesia’s founding father and first president, in the 1950s. Many of his predecessors toyed with similar plans. The idea is not unique to Indonesia either. Countries around the world, from Nigeria to Myanmar, have relocated their capitals.  If the plan is implemented, there is no reason why it would not work. Fewer Jakartans would reduce the strain on the city’s roads and rivers. And the experience of other countries suggests that when civil servants move, private-sector jobs follow, often in services like law and consulting. Yet getting it done will be tricky. Bureaucrats are likely to resist a move away from the schools and hospitals, let alone the glitzy bars and malls, of Jakarta. Moreover, Indonesian politics is beset by self-interested oligarchs, many of whom own real estate in Jakarta and would not like to see the value of their property portfolios fall. They have halted less-ambitious reforms, which were not in their interests, with relative ease. Even without this resistance, presidential term limits mean Jokowi’s reign will last only five more years. The government concedes that moving the capital will probably take twice as long. His successor could easily reverse his changes, perhaps citing the rampant corruption and overrun costs that afflict most large government projects in Indonesia. Leaving Jakarta will be a slow and laborious process—rather like getting anywhere in Jakarta itself. Related story:Capital flight: Why governments want to move civil servants out of national capitals  https://www.economist.com/international/2019/04/04/why-governments-move-civil-servants-out-of-national-capitals