“WHAT IS millennial culture?” Bret Easton Ellis asked in a recent interview with the Sunday Times of London. “There’s no writing. They don’t care about literature. None of them read books.” He went on: “Where is the great millennial novel? There isn’t one.” Mr Ellis, the so-called “bad boy of American literature”, was at his zenith in the 1980s and ‘90s when he published novels such as “Less Than Zero” and “American Psycho”. “White”, a work of nonfiction, is his first book in nearly a decade. It is advertised as an “admonishment of received truths”; mostly it is a screed on what he calls “Generation Wuss”. His main source on the subject appears to be his younger boyfriend, Todd, and Todd’s friends.  The millennial Mr Ellis conjures is already familiar from newspaper thinkpieces. She eats $8 avocado toast and drinks $5 lattes, while her parents pay her rent and her therapy bills. She scrolls listlessly through social media, occasionally allowing herself to be outraged by opinions she does not agree with. She measures her worth in likes, and has not picked up a book since college. Facts rather complicate this picture, not least when it comes to who millennials actually are. The youngest, born in the early 2000s, are just entering college and cannot legally drink beer in America. Others are pushing 40, and likely have families of their own and no interest in social media whatsoever. While the term is handy for curmudgeons, “millennial” encompasses a wide range of ages and experiences, as the Wall Street Journal style guide pointed out when cautioning against the overuse of the term in the paper’s pages. Another inconvenient truth is that millennials are reading, and more than other generations. Pew Research Centre, a think-tank, conducted a study in 2018 that found that 84% of 18- to 29-year-olds in America had read or listened to a book in some format in the past year (see chart). Of 30- to 49-year-olds, 74% had done so; for  50- to 64-year-olds the figure was 71%. Adults aged 65 and older were the least interested in the written word. Such details are inconvenient for the standard caricature. The myth of millennials’ neglect of culture persists not because it is true or useful, but because it serves the interests of someone like Mr Ellis, who has built his career on provocation. In the past he has acknowledged that he has young readers: in an interview from 2005, Mr Ellis said that he gets fan mail about “Less Than Zero” (1985) “from people who weren’t really born yet when the book came out”. Yet perhaps the most telling moment in the Sunday Times piece is when Decca Aitkenhead, the interviewer, asks him if he’s read Sally Rooney, the author of the novels “Conversations with Friends” and “Normal People”, which was nominated for the Man Booker prize. Ms Rooney, who was born in 1991, is often hailed—and assailed—as “first great millennial novelist”. Mr Ellis says: “Er, remind me who Sally Rooney is?” While deriding millennials for not reading, Mr Ellis reveals that he hasn’t read much of their writing, either. Ms Aitkenhead points out that he also hasn’t bothered with “The Coddling of the American Mind”, Greg Lukianoff’s and Jonathan Haidt’s popular treatise, and “to have written a book about the mindset of millennials without bothering to consult this...seems a remarkable omission”. Ross Douthat, a columnist for the New York Times, recently made a similar comment about the absence of generational novel. What they both actually seem to be saying is that they haven’t read a great millennial novel, and because they are tastemakers, it follows that there isn’t one. If there is no “Great Novel” for this generation it may well be because the generational novel was always a myth. There is something to be gained by eschewing the idea of the “Great Millennial Novel” altogether: it encourages reading variously and widely, rather than seeking a particular voice to fit a stereotype. That, incidentally, is what millennials are already doing.