WHEN SEVEN weeks of ascetic abnegation culminate in a joyful Easter celebration, Orthodox Christians are supposed to be in amity with one another, and at peace with the world. That is more a statement of the obvious. Since a calendar reform of the 1920s, Christians of the east have been divided over when to celebrate say, Christmas; but virtually all, whether in Muscovite cathedrals or tiny Balkan villages, mark Easter on the same date (often, as this year, different from the western one) and in broadly the same style. It is a style that stresses inclusivity. The service features a famous sermon by Archbishop John Chrysostom (c349-407) which invites everybody to the Easter feast, whether they have fasted rigorously or only a little or not at all: “The table is lavishly laden, let all enjoy it sumptuously!” Elsewhere in the prayers, there are exhortations like: “Let us embrace one another! Let us say…even to those who hate us, may all be pardoned in the light of the Resurrection!”  Against this warm and forgiving background, people were watching closely for any slight mending of a split within the Orthodox world which has been described by one of the protagonists, the Patriarchate of Moscow, as the bitterest inter-Orthodox division for many centuries. It concerns the proclamation in January of an independent Ukrainian church, with the blessing of the Istanbul-based Patriarch of Constantinople, who traditionally enjoys “primacy of honour” in world Orthodoxy. In a thundering retaliation for what it called encroachment on its canonical territory, the Moscow Patriarchate severed relations with the Istanbul-based hierarch, Bartholomew I, and told its flock not to receive the sacraments (supremely sacred church rites) in places under his authority. In recent weeks and over Easter, there have been signs of things getting just a little bit easier, or at least of people learning to live with deep disagreement. A change at the top may help. The politician who spearheaded the creation of the Orthodox Church of Ukraine (OCU), Petro Poroshenko, lost last weekend’s presidential elections to a comic actor, Volodymyr Zelensky. The Muscovite hierarchy apparently sees this as an opportunity for a fresh start. Patriarch Kirill sent the new head of state a warm letter of congratulation and his Easter message contained no vituperation over Ukraine. As a practising Orthodox Christian, Mr Poroshenko had been passionately involved in church affairs and staked his unsuccessful election campaign on a slogan of “army, language and faith”. Mr Zelensky, who is Jewish, has less obvious interest in inter-Orthodox disputes. Those disputes rumble on. Muscovites complain that parishes loyal to Kirill are being taken over improperly by Ukrainian nationalists. The OCU retorts that any transfers are voluntary. Whatever the circumstances, about 500 congregations have switched allegiance from the Patriarchate of Moscow to the OCU; that probably leaves around 11,000 communities in Muscovite hands, against nearly 8,000 for the OCU. In any case, the church which Mr Poroshenko helped to found was proud to celebrate its first Easter since receiving the Tomos, a document issued in Istanbul that certifies its independence. Perhaps a little crestfallen, the former president stood near the front as Metropolitan Epifaniy, the 40-year-old primate of the new church, led the Resurrection chants. This was also the first year in which the independent Ukrainian church participated in one of the most spectacular Easter rituals that bind the Orthodox world together. As soon as the “Holy Fire” symbolising the Resurrection is kindled in the Church of the Holy Sepulchre in Jerusalem, usually on Saturday afternoon, the flames (or rather lanterns kindled from the flame) are swiftly transported to Orthodox communities near and far. Palestinian Christians drum the fire through their streets, while planes whisk flickering lamps to places like Greece, Cyprus, Russia—and, as of 2019, Ukraine. It was brought to Saint Michael’s Cathedral in Kiev by a group of 30 volunteers, including some war veterans. In Istanbul, meanwhile, Patriarch Bartholomew solemnly prayed for all the other leaders of Orthodox churches, including Moscow’s Kirill and Kiev’s Epifaniy, as he led the four-hour overnight service. Mr Zelensky was reported to have headed to Turkey for a short holiday but he was not to be seen at the Patriarchate. In other ways, though, he seems to have entered the paschal spirit. He had upset the leaders of the new Ukrainian church by waggishly comparing their beloved Tomos, or certificate of religious freedom, with a thermos, which in Slavic languages as well as English refers to a humdrum device for keeping drinks at a stable temperature. But over the weekend, leaders of the OCU said the new President had apologised for his joke and they had warmly forgiven him; they wished him well with his presidency.