IT IS NOT always a mistake to refight the last battle. Joe Biden, addressing the first crowd of his official campaign on April 29th, in Pittsburgh, promised to overcome the mistakes made by the Democrats in 2016. Three years ago his party failed to fire up blue-collar workers, especially in the Midwest. Mr Biden said he would focus on the power of organised labour and ordinary, middle-class folk—the backbone of America, he said, from teachers to health-workers to plumbers—who do extraordinary things. “I am a union man, period”, he vowed, earning cheers of “We want Joe!” He stood in a union hall, before a “Biden Workers for America” poster, amid members of a firefighters’ union that had just endorsed him. He also said his campaign would focus on the small towns and struggling parts of Pennsylvania that Democrats neglected so badly in 2016. Democrats tend to do well in cities and suburbs, but Mr Trump fired up large numbers of rural voters, turning Pennsylvania Republican in the first presidential race since 1988. Mr Biden had chosen Pittsburgh to launch his campaign, he said, because: “If I’m gonna beat Donald Trump in 2020, it’s going to happen here”.  His map-reading is spot on. No Democratic presidential candidate since Harry Truman in 1948 has reached the White House without taking Pennsylvania. Mr Trump’s path to a second term almost certainly depends on his holding on to the state’s 20 electoral college votes. Along with Michigan and Wisconsin, which Mr Trump also narrowly won, the state will serve as the centre of the 2020 campaign. Mr Biden’s big advantage is that he can cast himself as a local boy. He was born in the state, was a senator next door in Delaware and has long been claimed by Pennsylvania Democrats as their own. Nothing in Mr Biden’s cautious speech in Pittsburgh was surprising, including his failure to mention immigration (he knows that more than a few blue-collar voters in the Midwest agree with Mr Trump’s position on that). He has borrowed a slogan—“the dignity of work”—that was previously deployed this year to good effect by another Midwestern presidential-aspirant, Sherrod Brown. In early March Mr Brown, a 66-year-old senator from Ohio, said he would not enter the race. That disappointed many who saw him as an affable younger version of 76-year-old Mr Biden. But it cleared Mr Biden’s path to stand as the representative for America's ordinary, hard-working folk. The approach is calculated to undermine a president during a time of prolonged economic growth. By saying “the dignity of work is my measure”, Mr Biden brushes aside statistics about low unemployment and high GDP, pointing instead to how ordinary workers feel. His talk of higher wages and more respect could resonate well with some of the president’s wavering supporters. What does the start of Mr Biden’s campaign mean for his Democratic rivals? Polls suggest he is the solid frontrunner, with 25% or more support in a crowded field. After eight years as vice-president to Barack Obama, who remains enormously popular, Mr Biden starts with a big advantage. Most people already know who he is. Last week he raised more money—$6.3m—in the first 24 hours of his campaign than any other candidate had. He also instantly attracted Mr Trump’s attention. Ahead of his first rally the president posted a tweet about “sleepy Joe Biden” and the leaders of the fire fighters’ union who endorsed him. At times during his rally Mr Biden sounded like a less angry, more upbeat version of Mr Trump—at one point he chastised the bosses of GM, a carmaker, for closing factories in America and opening a new plant in Mexico. Mr Biden’s greatest strength is his ability to be a voice for the sort of angry, blue-collar worker who drifted away from the Democrats in 2016, while also promising to be a more civil, hopeful and upbeat sort of leader. More than once during his speech he emphasised his optimism, telling voters to choose “hope over fear” and “truth over lies”. Mr Biden will be vulnerable, however, if primary voters reject the idea of refighting the battle of 2016. He might make amends for Hillary Clinton’s failure to excite blue-collar supporters. He might, by virtue of his association with Mr Obama, win the backing of many African-Americans. But other parts of the Democrats’ broad coalition—including urban, youthful voters, or people who want make history by electing a female president or a gay one—do not want to vote for an elderly white man. On policy, meanwhile, Mr Biden can appear cautious—he is anxious not to scare away swing voters, even if that means failing to inspire those to his left. Though he criticised Mr Trump’s tax cut, for example, he did not propose reinstating higher taxes on the rich. Instead he promised to close “tax loopholes” that supposedly let the rich evade $1.6 trillion in taxes. That is a big number, but it is a long way from the grand promises made by some of his rivals. Mr Biden is a cautious man. But for now he appears to be the Democrat most likely to take on Mr Trump next year.