“I WAS walking along the road with two friends – the sun was setting,” Edvard Munch wrote in his diary in 1892. “Suddenly the sky turned blood red...there was blood and tongues of fire above the blue-black fjord and the city...I sensed an infinite scream passing through nature.” The scene inspired Munch’s best-known work, currently on display at the British Museum. “The Scream” exists in four different versions, each with thick, stark lines reverberating with a sound that can never be heard. Robert Rosenblum, an art historian, has suggested that the image was inspired by a Peruvian mummy, buried with its hands clutching its face, which was exhibited at the Exposition Universelle in Paris in 1889. “Human Misery” (1888), a painting by Paul Gauguin, also drew on this particular mummy, as did his “D'ou Venons Nous / Que Sommes Nous / Où Allons Nous” (1897). The frightened face recurs in Munch’s work, too. In the painting “Dead Mother and Child” (1901) a small boy stands by his mother’s corpse, his hands covering his ears; “Inheritance” (1916) bears similar traces of “The Scream”.  Munch’s “face distorted by despair” has permeated popular culture. The image inspired the GhostFace mask in “Scream”, a horror film franchise, which exaggerates the ghoulish and sinister qualities of the painting. In the poster for “Home Alone” (1990), a young Macaulay Culkin assumes a similar facial expression. In the internet age, the artwork has influenced the design of the scream emoji. Why does the act of screaming fascinate viewers and audiences? Screams are disturbing, an explosion of feeling that is not verbal yet not quite nonsense. They are primal, involuntary reflexes that represent a loss of control. There are many, often contradictory, reasons to scream: fear, shock, pain and pleasure. All can be traced through art, literature and music. Arthur Janov, a psychologist, thought that screams could uncover repressed childhood trauma. The cover of his book (“The Primal Scream”, 1970) promised that “what I heard may change the nature of psychotherapy as it is now known – an eerie scream welling up from the depths of a young man”. His approach inspired John Lennon, whose screaming can be heard on the tracks “Mother” and “Well, Well, Well” on his first solo album; Yoko Ono’s music, too, features plenty of guttural sounds. A scream, at the beginning of a novel, jolts the reader awake. “Gravity’s Rainbow” (1973) opens as “a screaming comes across the sky”—that of a V2 rocket about to fall on London—whereby Thomas Pynchon instantly evokes the terrors of his wartime setting. When novels end with a scream, the effect is unsettling. Francis Spufford closes “Golden Hill” with the narrator remembering “how good it was,” at a pivotal moment, “to scream”. Elsewhere, shrieks are imbued with philosophical depths. In the final scene of “King Lear”, Lear repeats “howl, howl, howl, howl”; his garbled scream of agony at the death of Cordelia has been reinterpreted in myriad ways by actors over the centuries. In Tennessee Williams’s short story “Miss Coynte of Greene”, the grandmother screams “like a peacock in heat” to attract the attention of her family. Abigail and her fellows in “The Crucible” (pictured, above) screech in unison as a form of manipulation. Cinema is also famous for its screams. The most important scene of “Psycho” (1960, pictured, top), for Alfred Hitchcock, was that of Janet Leigh in the shower; her scream of terror harmonises with Bernard Herrmann’s jagged score. Steven Spielberg made actors scream as part of the audition process for “Jurassic Park” (1993). When he watched the tapes back at home at night, Ariana Richards’s cry jolted Mr Spielberg’s wife awake, and she ran to check her children were safe. He cast Ms Richards immediately. Some screams become motifs. The “Wilhelm Scream”, a stock sound effect created in 1951 for the film “Distant Drums”, has been used in over 389 films and TV series since. It features in “Star Wars: A New Hope” (1977) when a Stormtrooper falls to his death after being shot by Luke Skywalker, and several times in the Indiana Jones films. The tagline of “Alien” (1979), “In Space, No One Can Hear You Scream”, established both the film’s appreciation of science—sound waves do not travel well through space—as well as the vastness and isolation of the setting. A blood-curdling scream represents an extreme of emotion; it both excites and terrifies. When Rosa Klebb, the villain of “From Russia With Love” (1957), interrogated her victims, she “would watch the eyes in the face a few inches away from hers and breathe in the screams as if they were perfume”.