The Parisian. By Isabella Hammad. Grove Press; 576 pages; $27. Jonathan Cape; £14.99 THIS NOVEL about people with layered or doubled lives has a suitably ambiguous title. Midhat Kamal, the faltering but sympathetic hero of Isabella Hammad’s debut, becomes known as the “Parisian”—in Arabic, al-Barisi—after his return from years of study in France. Back home in Nablus, north of Jerusalem, Midhat must try to reconcile the free-thinking ideals fostered by his years in Montpellier and Paris with the duties of a son and heir. Custom and loyalty demand that he marry, sustain the family’s name, and prepare to run his father’s textile business. Meanwhile, his Muslim community is shaken by the first world war, the fall of the Ottoman Empire and the arrival of British Mandate rule in Palestine. In the first act of this lavish, leisurely and immersive novel, Midhat’s craving for intellectual freedom and “cosmopolitan life” finds a focus in his love for Jeannette, the daughter of his academic host in France. Predictably, prejudice and misunderstanding thwart their union. Throughout, Ms Hammad counts the psychic cost of the gulf between others’ views of Midhat and his own. Disoriented, in every sense, Midhat quits his medical studies. He accepts “an embrace of otherness” and drifts through the hedonism of postwar Paris, while flirting with the politics of Arab liberation.  He travels back to the post-Ottoman Nablus of the 1920s with a “double view” and a divided soul. In that prosperous but faction-riven hotbed of “jealousy and scandal”, Midhat takes over his father’s shop and half-willingly marries the strong-minded Fatima, the daughter of an independence leader. Via a succession of scenes framed, paced and coloured with artistry, Ms Hammad entwines domestic intrigue with public strife. A “fever of unity” slowly binds the Palestinian elite and the peasantry into a campaign against the injustice of the British Mandate. Despite the local backbiting, the riots and repressions, Midhat lets his dream of Europe fade. His home, and his clan, seems to suck him in, with its “webs of subtle comfort, of knowing and being known”. Yet he remains as profoundly torn as the “crossover figures” around him—above all, the mysterious French scholar-priest Père Antoine, another of this book’s uneasy chameleons. As strikes and protests escalate into the armed Arab revolt of 1936, Midhat’s secret self, with its “glamour of hiddenness”, bursts out of its carefully constructed social shell. His trauma mirrors the collective unrest of the times. Raised in London, now living in New York, Ms Hammad herself has family roots in Nablus (she has said that Midhat is based on her great-grandfather). Like its riven protagonist, her novel—an English-language epic steeped in Palestinian stories from almost a century ago—can feel tugged between two worlds. Midhat’s overlapping identities seem to him like “conflicting maps of the same place”. Similarly, Ms Hammad overlays a sophisticated, up-to-date grasp of the scars, overt and covert, left by unjust authority onto the traditional pleasures of the sprawling historical saga. Echoes from classic European fiction (Midhat reads Flaubert) mingle with a debt to the hybrid storytelling perfected, in Arabic, by the Egyptian novelist Naguib Mahfouz—above all, in his great “Cairo Trilogy”. “The Parisian” comes across as both old-fashioned and modern-minded. Despite a few dragging interludes, Ms Hammad’s command of the broad picture and the filigree detail alike makes this paradoxical tone succeed. One of Midhat’s French friends disdains the small stuff since he “was an architect, not a carpenter”. Ms Hammad knows, and triumphantly shows, that a novelist of vision must be both.