ALWAYS ON THE lookout for a bargain, Gulliver takes great pride in using public transport when he travels abroad. Journeys between airports and city centres are no exception. Most of the time finding the cheapest route takes no more effort than logging onto an airport’s websites or opening a navigation app such as Google Maps. Sometimes, however, airports are not co-operative, trying their best to shove visitors onto convenient but overpriced transport links. Arlanda Airport near Stockholm, the capital of Sweden, is by far the worst offender Gulliver has encountered.  Passengers arriving at Terminal 5, which handles most of Arlanda’s international flights, are presented with clear signage to its train and bus stations. The train station is served by the Arlanda Express, a high-speed rail link that covers the 40km stretch to Stockholm Central Station in just 20 minutes. Many business travellers swear by the service for its speed and convenience. But with standard one-way fares costing 295 SEK ($31), those paying for their own ticket may feel less happy about the price. An alternative is offered by Flygbussarna, a private bus company, which does the journey by road in 40 minutes. One-way tickets purchased from its drivers cost 119 SEK–by no means an exorbitant amount, but not exactly a steal either. A quick visit to Arlanda’s website gives the strong impression that these are the only two options. But there are in fact more than that. Three commuter buses also connect the airport with Märsta Station, 20 minutes from Arlanda. From there you can take a 40-minute train to Stockholm Central. Because the entire journey can be made within a 75-minute window, passengers only need to buy a single ticket. That costs just 32 SEK if you invest in a prepaid swipe card, or 45 SEK if you do not. That one can reach Stockholm city centre for nearly one-tenth the price of the Arlanda Express is nothing exceptional. The price difference is roughly comparable to that at London’s Heathrow Airport between the Heathrow Express, an overground rail service which is Britain’s most expensive train per mile, and the cheap-as-chips London Underground system. Local buses are also well signposted at its terminals. What is exceptional at Arlanda, however, is the lengths to which it has gone to hide the very existence of the cheaper commuter bus services. As well as excluding them from its website, the airport diverts passengers away from its own bus station. Instead, people arriving at Terminal 5 must ignore the signage and go upstairs to the departures level before waiting at an unmarked stop. (The actual signpost has been placed so far away from the doors of the terminal that bus drivers pay no attention to it and hardly stop there.) Alternatively, local buses also stop at a nearby office complex—another option that requires passengers to ignore all the airport’s signage to find the buses there. Gulliver appreciates that the public-private partnership which built the Arlanda Express in the 1990s–at a mind-blowing cost of 6bn SEK–wants to recover at least part of its investment. That is why passengers are also hit with a 120 SEK “station access fee” if they attempt to take slower commuter trains to Stockholm. But free competition between different modes of transport is good for travellers as it spurs efficiency and helps keep a lid on fare levels. Both Arlanda and the City of Stockholm risk losing footfall to other cities if their visitors feel ripped off every time they arrive at the airport.