ON APRIL 30TH Emperor Akihito (pictured, right) will step down as the head of Japan’s royal family after 30 years on the throne. The 85-year-old monarch’s decision came as a shock, as it is the first imperial abdication since 1817. Akihito’s eldest son, Crown Prince Naruhito (pictured, left), will duly become the 126th emperor of the world’s oldest monarchy, which according to Japanese myth traces its origins directly back to the Shinto sun goddess, Amaterasu. What does the change of emperor mean for Japan? The postwar constitution changed the emperor from a living god with political powers, including the right to declare war, to a symbol of Japan. Akihito, who ascended the throne in 1989, has interpreted this role differently from his father. Rather than sitting in the palace and praying, he made the emperor more approachable. He married a commoner, the first monarch to do so in nearly 2,680 years of imperial history, visited sanatoriums that house leprosy patients, and championed the Paralympics. After the Tohoku earthquake of 2011, which devastated much of north-eastern Japan, he and his wife, Empress Michiko, went to talk with survivors, kneeling on the floor and holding their hands. He has done much to atone for Japan’s wartime history, visiting battlefields such as Saipan and Palau to pay tribute to those who lost their lives. And he has refrained from visiting Yasukuni, a controversial shrine in Tokyo that enshrines the souls of 14 high-ranking war criminals.  The most obvious change that Naruhito’s succession brings to Japan is the beginning of a new era, Reiwa, which means “beautiful harmony”. Naruhito will have his own ideas about what it means to be a symbol. The Oxford-educated crown prince and the empress-to-be—a Harvard graduate and multilingual diplomat before she joined the imperial family—may be more visible on the international stage than Akihito and Michiko, who tended to focus on supporting Japan’s vulnerable groups. But it is unlikely that Naruhito will deviate far from the path that his father trod over the past three decades. Akihito’s approval rating hovers around 80%. Naruhito will continue to visit disaster-affected areas and advocate for the disabled. He will carry on Akihito’s legacy, revisiting Japan’s wartime past and shunning Yasukuni. Akihito’s efforts to bridge the gap between the monarchy and the public have ensured his family’s popularity. But imperial crises loom that not even a popular monarch can fix. Under Japan’s Imperial Household Law, the family cannot be headed by a female, so on Naruhito’s accession, the next in line of succession will be his brother, followed by his 12-year-old nephew. The family will diminish further from its current 18 members, since women must leave the imperial household when they marry commoners. Ideas for addressing these problems, such as welcoming female monarchs, have been met with fierce opposition from traditionalists, who represent a support base for the prime minister, Shinzo Abe. Royal rituals, which often have strong Shinto elements, have also been embroiled in controversy. Critics argue that the use of public funds for imperial ceremonies violates the constitutional principle of separation of religion and state. But for now,  a new emperor means a fresh start. After an era marked by economic downturn and natural disasters, the country is ready to embrace a new age.