THE WORD liberalism is ambiguous. To some it evokes the generosity of the state; to others it suggests a surrender to the free market. Supporters see it as a way to guard free expression; critics consider it a means to allow noxious ideas. But this is hardly new: throughout its history, the term has meant different things to different people. Helena Rosenblatt, a historian of political thought at the City University of New York, has peered into its origins and evolution in her book, “The Lost History of Liberalism”. The concept flourished in France in the early 1800s to describe the emergence of individual rights, the rule of law and representative government. Only later was it adopted in Britain and America (and in the second half of the 20th century applied to left-of-centre politics in America).  As part of The Economist’s Open Future initiative, we are publishing an excerpt from Ms Rosenblatt’s book, on Adam Smith’s liberalism and colonial America. It is followed by a short interview with her about the need for liberals to ditch technocratic nerdery and once again embrace narrative, sentiment and higher purpose. *      *      * From Liberal Charters to Liberal ConstitutionsExcerpt from “The Lost History of Liberalism: From Ancient Rome to the Twenty-First Century” by Helena Rosenblatt (Princeton University Press, 2018) Since medieval times, kings and emperors had granted charters conferring rights or privileges to towns, companies, or individuals. The sovereigns granting them, or the charters themselves, were called liberal when the rights they conferred were regarded as robust and, for example, involved generous economic concessions and considerable self­-government. When Englishmen left their homeland for the New World, they brought with them what they often called liberal charters establishing the colonies, and when tensions arose between England and America in the mid-­eighteenth century, much discussion revolved around whether the British government had the right to change the terms of these charters and impose new regulations and taxes on the colonies. Americans insisted that such impositions violated the charters as well as the protections accorded to them by the British constitution. They were no longer generous, not based on the principle of reciprocity; they were no longer liberal. It was in this highly politicized environment that Adam Smith published his famous book, An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations (1776). Today regarded as a foundational text of classical liberalism, it spoke directly to American concerns. Smith himself called it a “very violent attack...upon the whole commercial system of Great Britain.” Not only did he denounce English trade policies and advocate instead what he called a “liberal system of free exportation and free importation,” but he used the economy of North America to highlight the flaws of that of England. America illustrated the advantages of a system of natural liberty, in which the unimpeded investment in agriculture was causing rapid progress toward wealth and greatness. By contrast, Britain’s complicated and corrupt system of tariffs, bounties, monopolies, and other legal devices was just enriching the already wealthy while leaving the rest of the country impoverished. Smith’s use of the word “liberal” in his Wealth of Nations conjured up a centuries-­old meaning with which we are now familiar. It was a word whose moral meaning every educated gentleman of his time would have understood. In book IV, chapter 9, Smith favored “allowing every man to pursue his own interest his own way upon the liberal plan of equality, liberty and justice.” Smith’s “liberal plan,” his readers would immediately have recognized, was about not only freedom but also generosity and reciprocity. It is often forgotten that Smith’s first major and possibly most influential work was on ethics. In his Theory of Moral Sentiments (1759), Smith wrote that “he is not a citizen who does not wish to promote, by every means in his power, the welfare of the whole society of his fellow-­citizens.” “The wise and virtuous man,” he continued, “is at all times willing that his own private interest should be sacrificed to the public interest of his own particular order or society. He is at all times willing, too, that the interest of this order or society should be sacrificed to the greater interest of the state or sovereignty of which it is only a subordinate part.” Moreover, Smith endorsed “liberality” as one of the cardinal virtues and the treatise contains a long discussion of gratitude and benevolence. The liberal principles Smith advocated in the Wealth of Nations were “in the interest of the public,” while mercantile ones favored the “mean rapacity” of British merchants and manufacturers who, in league with the landowning aristocracy, con­spired against the public good. Smith defended free trade on the grounds that it would increase the welfare of “the lowest ranks of the people” and work “for the benefit of the poor and the indigent.” Unsurprisingly, Americans read the Wealth of Nations as a vindication of their policy of separation from England. Within a few months of its publication, the Continental Congress opened American ports to all foreign vessels and American calls for free trade grew louder. The new country’s very survival depended on it. Through the negotiation of new and liberal trade agreements with the nations of the world, Americans hoped for the advent of a new era of prosperity and peace. And on July 4, 1776, the Continental Congress adopted the Declaration of Independence by which the United States announced its secession from the British Empire and its reasons for doing so. Governments, the Americans argued, derived their authority from the consent of the governed. They were instituted to secure the unalienable rights of men. Whenever a government became destructive toward those ends, it was the right of the people to resist and even overthrow it. Men, moreover, were created equal and possessed the rights to life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness. All thirteen new states soon provided themselves with written constitutions establishing virtually the same principle: it was to secure the unalienable rights of men that governments were instituted. Of course, the concern for rights and their protections was not new in 1776. The British government itself recognized that it had granted charters conferring rights and privileges to the colonies. A major difference in the Declaration of Independence was that rights were now seen as natural, equal, and binding. They were no longer understood to be privileges granted by a liberal sovereign and thus subject to revocation by him. This inflection in the concept of rights involved a corresponding change in the use of the word “liberal.” While it had previously been employed to designate the generous and freedom­-loving concessions of a sovereign to his subjects, or the magnanimous and tolerant behavior of an aristocratic elite, it was now used to describe the generous and free constitution of a people who legislated themselves. […] A liberal country was not a democratic one. By any measure, the United States was not a democracy in the eighteenth century. And, in any case, to most people at the time, “democracy” was synonymous with anarchy or mob rule. But neither did the United States recognize hereditary privilege. And thus it demanded that each citizen display a “truly noble liberality of sentiment and affection,” a civic commitment by each individual “to embrace the good of all.” _____________________ Excerpted from “The Lost History of Liberalism: From Ancient Rome to the Twenty-First Century” by Helena Rosenblatt. Published by Princeton University Press. Copyright © 2018 by Helena Rosenblatt. All rights reserved. *      *      * An interview with Helena Rosenblatt The Economist: Historically speaking, are there certain social or economic conditions that tend to make liberalism popular? And if so, what factors achieve the opposite effect? Ms Rosenblatt: Liberalism was born in a crisis that was both economic and political, namely the French Revolution. During the 19th century, however, economic and political crises also caused many to turn away from liberalism and toward socialism. In the 20th century, the Great Depression gave rise to the liberal New Deal. Today, downturns in certain sectors of the economy have attracted the electorate to populism. So, it is hard to generalise about the influence of social or economic trends on liberalism’s popularity. Personally, I believe that its prospects are greatly improved when liberals can deliver a clear message that is both hopeful and morally uplifting. History shows us that they are successful when they don’t just appeal to people’s economic needs and interests, but also to their sentiments, moral compasses and even certain needs of the soul. It seems that communicating a moral vision through inspiring leadership is more important today than ever. The Economist: Liberalism prides itself on rationality to such a degree that it seems outside the emotive, narrative-driven part of people's decisions, attitudes and values. Little wonder it's on the back-foot as populists are on the march. Can liberalism embrace sentiment and story to compete without losing its soul of reason? Ms Rosenblatt: Of course! The majority of liberals in the past embraced sentiments at least as much as reason, and believed in values as much as they believed in policies and procedures. Benjamin Constant and Madame de Staël, whom I argue are two of the real founders of “liberalism,” wrote copiously about emotions and feelings. Constant emphasised the importance of religious sentiments in any liberal society, while Madame de Staël wrote novels to cultivate the feelings she felt were needed to support and nurture a liberal political system, particularly generosity and compassion in her readers. And of course, both liberals believed in reason, science and enlightenment too. Sentiments and reason were not seen as antithetical to each other. It is only recently that liberals have lost touch with that crucial side of liberalism and become more policy-oriented, even technocratic in outlook. They speak of interests and choices more than values and obligations. I believe that people are craving for meaning and a higher purpose to their lives. The Economist: Why did France become the cradle of liberalism? Ms Rosenblatt: Many of your readers will undoubtedly be surprised to hear that liberalism owes its origins to France. We are so used to taking for granted that liberalism is an age-old and venerable Anglo-American tradition. But if you follow the history of the actual word, as my book does, you learn that “liberalism” was coined and first theorised in France in the early 1810s as a result of the French Revolution. It stood for a cluster of principles that the more moderate revolutionaries were fighting for: the rule of law, civil equality, constitutional and representative government and a number of individual rights. Interestingly, evidence suggests that the word “liberalism” was invented as a term of abuse by its enemies and was originally meant to stigmatise these principles as a “religio-political heresy.” For most of the nineteenth century, liberalism was widely seen as a French doctrine and was closely associated with France’s successive revolutions (1789, 1830, 1848 and 1871). “Liberalism” remained a rare word in the language of English and American politics. It only gained currency in America’s political vocabulary in the early 20th century, and by then its meaning had been utterly transformed. The Economist: You note that liberalism originated in France in the 1800s but that the term "liberal" appeared earlier, notably by Adam Smith in the 1700s. How did the concept develop in Britain and France—and what was the interaction between the two places? Ms Rosenblatt: The word “liberal” had been in use for centuries before “liberalism” was coined; but it was not a political or economic term. Instead it designated the ideal qualities of the member of a ruling elite. In Britain it referred to the virtues expected of a gentleman, in France those of a nobleman: magnanimity, generosity, devotion to freedom and the common good. Adam Smith used the word this way in his famous text, The Wealth of Nations. The French Revolution, while giving birth to the word “liberalism,” also added a new and political meaning to the word “liberal”. In Britain, when the word meant something political, it was often rendered in italics, or with an “e” at the end to indicate its foreignness and dangerousness. Gradually, both “liberal” and “liberalism” lost their revolutionary connotations. And with the advance of industrialisation, “liberalism” took on new meanings. It could now designate certain policies toward the economy, such as “new liberalism” and “classical liberalism,” the first favoring increased government intervention and the latter opposing it. The Economist: Why does it look like so many Americans are ready to discard it? Ms Rosenblatt: The attraction of dictators grows in periods of uncertainty, such as the one we are living through today, when people are vulnerable to simple solutions. Charismatic leaders emerge who appeal to their emotions and often to their basest instincts. Many liberal politicians today have lost touch with people. They seem elitist, technocratic and aloof. We need leaders who can not only articulate good policies and laws, but who can also inspire people and morally uplift them. But the paucity of good liberal leadership is only partly to blame. A huge problem, I believe, is our undervalued and thus underfunded public education system. Many voters today are woefully ignorant of their history and unschooled in the basic principles of citizenship. Moreover, there has been too much emphasis on vocational training and too little on the liberal arts and humanities. The 19th-century liberals knew that the survival of liberal democracies required a politically-educated citizenry. As Alexis de Tocqueville said, it is necessary to “educate democracy.” And this, he said, was “the primary duty imposed on the leaders of society today.”