WHEN “LITTLE WOODS” premiered to rapturous reviews at the Tribeca Film Festival last year—it currently holds a rare 100% approval rating on Rotten Tomatoes, a review-aggregator site—and was snatched up by Neon, a feted distributor, it signalled the arrival of a promising new voice in film. For her directorial debut, Nia DaCosta (who also wrote the script) has produced a profound work about the practical realities and emotional hardships of poverty, set in an oil boomtown in North Dakota. The film’s protagonist, Ollie (Tessa Thompson), is eight days from the end of her probation following an arrest for dealing Oxycontin. Though she is trying to stay on the right side of the law, two crises occur at once: the bank’s foreclosure on her home and the pregnancy of her estranged sister, Deb (Lily James). To save the family home and to pay for her sister’s abortion, Ollie is drawn back into a life of crime.  These contrivances might seem familiar, even clumsy, in lesser hands, but what makes “Little Woods” compelling are the fresh details crafted by Ms DaCosta. Before she decides to resume dealing drugs, Ollie is living below the poverty line. She makes ends meet by selling coffee and sandwiches to rig workers from the back of her truck. She has no romantic life—a rarity for films with female leads—and her only relationship to speak of is with her sister, whom she rarely sees and does not initially seem to care much for. When Deb comes to her for help, Ollie provides it not out of love or even necessity but from some unspoken understanding that Deb is the only real connection she has. It is a simple story, and one which touches on a panoply of current political issues: economic anxiety in rural America, opioid addiction, access to abortions and the cost of health care. Again, the film could have strayed into polemic, but Ms DaCosta keeps the policies in the background to focus on their human repercussions. Eschewing thundering speeches or grand injustices, the film unfolds simply as a series of problems for Ollie to solve. It is a successful and moving approach, even if it takes some time for the viewer to attune to the film’s quiet realism. What seems to be a premise taken directly from the crime-movie playbook—this is essentially a “one last heist” flick—is made surprising by the absence of thrilling chase scenes, showy cinematography, villainous cops or promises of riches. Instead, “Little Woods” is beholden to the realities of Ollie’s life. There is a natural tension that arises from her situation, but her dilemma is never made to feel like a caper. Even the emotional storyline, so often overdeveloped and melodramatic in films that focus on women, is muted. Through their travails, Ollie and Deb do reaffirm their sororal bond, but that is hardly the point: the point is to avoid destitution. Ms Thompson and Ms James underplay the emotions of their exchanges—neither of them reaches for likeability in their portrayals—and often they seem more like business partners than family. The critical success of “Little Woods” has already helped Ms DaCosta to land her next project. She has been lined up by Jordan Peele to helm a sequel of “Candyman” (1992), a classic horror film which touched on themes of race, class and urban gentrification. Ms DaCosta is a good fit for the material. She is on her way to becoming one of the foremost chroniclers of America’s “forgotten class”. “Little Woods” is released in America on April 19th