THE “SUBS” are, in effect, subhumans—people with a genetic rating at the low end of a 10-point scale. People tend to date others within their rate bracket. “Dealers” trade blood stolen from people with high ratings for those who need to dupe the tests. A commercial industry of self-help programmes exist for people to improve their rating, if only marginally. Individuals with famously high ratings are murdered by those protesting against “rate-ism”. The futuristic world depicted in “The Phlebotomist” is a disturbing one. A phlebotomist is someone who takes blood for medical tests. In the play, Bea, an ambitious woman who deals blood marries a louche fellow with a high rating, and her friendship deteriorates with Char, who has a genetic disorder and needs stolen blood.  This is the debut play by Ella Road, a 27-year-old British playwright and actor. It recently ended a run at the Hampstead Theatre in London, where it was nominated for an Olivier Award, Britain’s most prestigious theatrical prize. As part of The Economist’s Open Future project, we asked Ms Road about the challenges of presenting genetics on stage and how she views the technology’s benefits and risks. Following her replies is an excerpt from the play, in which Bea performs a blood test for Char. *      *      * The Economist: What spurred you to write a play about genetics? Ella Road: I think my initial interest in genetics came from a place of mild existential crisis. I worked at the Natural History Museum whilst training as an actor, and spent a lot of time pondering our place in the world. After graduating I became obsessed with researching genetics and altruism, trying to reconcile my politics with a biological world (and an industry) that seemed harsh, judgmental and competitive. I ended up writing this particular play largely because of a TEDx Talk I saw about pre-symptomatic genetic testing for cancer. The “would I want to know?” question fascinated me. It wasn’t until years later though, when a guy I was seeing decided to disclose that he was a carrier of a genetic disease “in case it affected our kids”—rather prematurely, age 23 and on our third date—that I saw the potential for a story. Relationships are so reliant on what we think we know about each other, the imaginary futures we create, and our subliminal expectations about what someone might deliver. I started to wonder how the availability of self-knowledge might exacerbate an “investment and return”-view of human life—and also open up the possibility of betrayal. The Economist: The play delves deeply into the negatives of genetic technologies. What are the benefits that may appear alongside those negatives? Ms Road: The potential benefits of genomics are huge, from the relatively clear-cut pros of pre-emptive treatment and precision medicine, to the slightly murkier areas of genetic editing, athletic selection and forensics. Being able to treat and advise patients according to individual biological predispositions saves time and therefore lives, as well as money. While genetic editing in humans is not (supposed to be) happening yet, the benefits largely come in the form of choices, such as mastectomies for BRCA mutations or lifestyle changes for those at risk of diabetes type 2 or lung cancer. Ultimately all this preparation still doesn’t negate the fact that life is unpredictable—and the healthiest individual could get knocked dead by a falling coconut—but it certainly helps. Some people have also flagged the benefits of the play’s new “genetic social order” because it does away with current hierarchies, but this view wrongly assumes that genetics and health exist in isolation from race and class. Certain diseases are more prominent within particular ethnic and economic groups, and environmental factors affect epigenetics. Living in an area of poor air quality, for example, can greatly impact one’s likelihood of developing a mutation for respiratory disease. People from lower income backgrounds are also less likely to have access to, or the time to implement, the nutrition and lifestyle changes necessary to manage their particular genomic potential. So the benefits are huge, but they’re not a fix-all. The Economist: One seeming wrinkle in the play is that genetics was used to predict people’s potential diseases but not used to cure it—the other side of the coin, so to speak. Why didn’t you include that part of the technology’s promise as well? Ms Road: I set out to explore a dramatic extreme of how this quest for knowledge might intersect with current social trends, and to generate a feeling of discomfort about certain aspects of contemporary culture, rather than to produce a balanced debate about genomics. Having said that, I do think the positive promises of the technology are implicit in the play. Characters monitor their personal “microbioms” and “fit-goals”, and discuss CRISPR Cas9 gene-editing trials for disease mutations. In the play, simple gene edits are already available, but edits for complex conditions are still in trial. I also tried to situate genetic treatment within the economics of their world: the positive potential of genomics isn’t clear-cut in a struggling NHS. These days we barely have the infrastructure to treat the population for diseases they already have, let alone to pre-emptively treat every possible condition that a patient may one day develop. I imagined editing would be expensive and therefore exclusive. At the end of the day, money still talks. The Economist: Having thought through a possible future so profoundly as a playwright, please now play the role of policymaker: what might be done to avert the dangers that you foresee? Ms Road: I think we need clear laws protecting citizens’ right to genetic confidentiality. In America the GINA Act theoretically prevents genetic discrimination, but recent cases show significant loopholes. In Britain there is a voluntary moratorium on companies demanding genetic information as part of medical checks, but it’s due for review. In genomics as in other areas, regulations around personal data struggle to keep pace with technological advancements. And the matter of confidentiality itself is not so black and white. One could argue (and companies do) that if a client withholds important information about their health, the imbalance of knowledge leaves the company vulnerable to exploitation. As genome mapping becomes more popular and laws become more necessary, I expect we’ll come up against resistance from insurance and mortgage providers who rely on a democracy of information. The Economist: You used the emotional medium of the theatre to communicate important points about human dignity, freedom, equality and fairness in a way that is more effective than a nerdy essay. In an age of populism and growing authoritarianism, how would you make the case for democracy and liberalism so that it has impact? Ms Road: There’s something about watching theatre that is in itself democratic; it requires the willing participation of both audience and company to create a performance community. In an increasingly atomised society, shared spaces and active experiences like this feel ever more important. Modern drama has been pretty successful in demonstrating the ills of populism and authoritarianism, but it is often limited to making us aware of the trap, rather than preventing us from falling into it. In our current climate, dramatising hope feels particularly necessary—and so perhaps we need to be a bit braver about exploring political empowerment on stage. In theatre our currency is the imagination; not only can we live out and learn from the worst-case scenarios, but we can also explore alternative realities without the fetters of realism. Maybe I need to get on and write some utopias… *      *      * A scene from “The Phlebotomist” By Ella Road [The play takes place in the future, when people are rated genetically on a scale of 1 to 10, and diseases can be predicted many years out. The scene involves two young women: Bea, who works as a phlebotomist (someone who draws blood for medical purposes), and an old friend, Char. The scene has been lightly edited from the original script.] Scene 2 Phlebotomy consultation booth. Bea sits beside a screen. Char paces. She has just had a blood test. Char: How long? Bea: Couple more minutes. Bea tidies away equipment. Char: Weird seeing you at work. Very professional. Bea: Ha. Though, if you don’t mind I’m gonna have to... Bea pulls out a lunchbox and sits down. Char: Is that/? Bea: Yep. Cheap and nutritious, why change? Char laughs, shakes her head. Bea eats. Char: Sorry for taking up your... Thanks so much for doing this. Bea: Was waiting for you to ask to be honest. You’re making the right decision. Char: It’s not really a ’decision’. Bea: Well you don’t technically have to/ Char: Yeah but not disclosing just looks worse doesn’t it. Like you have something to hide. Bea: Have you looked at other firms? Char: They’re all asking, all the good ones anyway. Bea: Well it’s amazing you’ve got this far at all isn’t it? It’s massive. That degree counts for something eh. Char shrugs. Beat. Char: Jesus the tension’s killing me! How do you stand this? Bea: People normally wait outside, or come back next day. Stops it being so/ Char: Horrendous? Sorry, sorry I’m being... I’m just feeling/ Bea: Come here. Look, whatever happens, I’m here for you OK? Whatever it is. Bea checks. Still nothing. You still seeing whats-her-face? With the hair. Char: Who? Oh. Nah nah, that was just a bit of...you know. She makes a face. Cackles. Nah, think I’m getting a bit sick of ’em to be honest. Might go back to men. Simpler. Bea: Ha, don’t know about that. Char: How is sexy Aaron? Sweet smelling and louche? Bea: Ha. Yeah he’s great. We’re good. We’re er, well... it looks like we might move in together actually, so... Char: What?! Bea: Yeah. Char: Fuckin hell Bea. That’s serious! Jeeeeeez! Well he is awwwwfully charming. [...] The device beeps. They both look at it. Bea gives Char a look, "Ready?". Char nods. Char: No, hold on. She takes a breath. OK. Bea goes to the screen, clicks and sees the results load. She swallows and scrolls down. Char watches her. Bea: Um. Char. Char: Don’t fuck with me. Bea: I’m not. Char: What is it? Please. Bea. Bea? Bea: I’m so sorry. Char: What is it? Bea: It’s the Huntington’s. Everything else is fine, it’s just/ Char: Fuck! Fuck. No, fuck! Oh fuck. Bea: I’m sorry. I’m really sorry. Char: God. Oh FUCK. Pause. How low is it? Bea: Two, point… Char: Let me see? Bea shows Char the screen. Char tries to hold herself together. Bea: Look obviously this is just a number. We can look through the breakdown? And then I’ll book you in with a specialist to discuss what it means/ Char: It means I’m unemployable. I’m nothing. I can’t do anything. Bea: Your general risk for cancers and most diseases is actually really low, which is really lucky, it’s the/ Char: Huntington’s. Incurable. Yeah, I know. Bea: But the overall/ Char: I don’t need the spiel Bea, I’m fucked. Bea: Sorry. Char: How long have I got? Bea: It’s speculative, I’m not supposed to/ Char: Yeah but everyone does, don’t they. Bea: It’s just a rough / Char: Please. Bea: I only take the blood, I don’t normally... Char looks at her. Bea reluctantly consults the breakdown. Er...OK...er, well your predisposition to heart disease is also quite... but the Huntington’s will kick in...soonish...so at a guess, lifestyle depending, you’re probably looking at somewhere between 8 to 10 years. Char: What? Bea: But obviously you have to take that with a pinch of, well, there are so many variables/ Char: I/ Bea: Or you might get hit by a tram tomorrow! So you / Sorry/ Char: Fuck / FUCK! Bea: I’ll refer you to a genetic counsellor Char, this really isn’t my/ Char: I have a degree. And a masters. I have worked my fucking arse off, it’s not fair! Bea: It’ll be alright. Char: No it won’t, do you know what this means?! Bea: I know what Hungtington’s is, Char. Char: Dad stopped being able to walk/ Bea: I know/ Char: Feed himself, hold things/ Bea: Stop it! Look. I’m gonna book you in with a counsellor. We need to start working out the best course of action for your disease. Char: I don’t have a disease. Bea: No, not yet, but... Pause. Bea goes to her and hugs her. Silence. Char: Can you delete the file please. Bea: What? Char: The results, the file, can you delete it? Bea: There’s no point, like you said, they’re all asking, not disclosing just looks worse. Char: Please, just/ Bea: Deleting it won’t change the result hun. Char: But if/ Bea: There’s no point! Char: There is! Listen. Just bear with me yeah. I mean obviously I knew there was a fifty-fifty chance I’d have it, but I never wanted to know, did I. But then criteria started appearing so I started thinking about what I could do if... I started looking at how people get around it. Bea: What? Char: If we used someone else’s blood, someone high, we could log it as me. Bea: What? Char: If we used someone else’s. Bea: What are you asking me? Char: If there’s someone high you’ve tested, we could, could we test that again in/stead Bea: Sshh! I could lose my job. Char: I’ve thought this through. Bea: Is that why you wanted me to do this? You said you needed moral support. Char: I did, I do. But I also thought if/ Bea: It’s illegal Char. It’s fraud. I can’t! I’d lose my job. It’s a good job, I can’t. Char: Are you enjoying this? Bea: What? Char: Having the upper hand. Bea: Don’t be stupid. Char: I can pay you. Bea: What? Char: I can/ Bea: No. Char: Dad left me a bit of/ Bea: Shut up. Char: I/ Bea: I don’t want money. Char: Well, you do. Bea: I’m fine, thank / you Char: Really? Bea: What are you doing? Char: I know you’re struggling. Bea: Excuse me? Char: You’re still paying off your mum’s loans right? Bea: I’m managing. Char: Porridge for lunch, and you could do with a new pair of/ Bea: You’re blowing my mind right now, Char. Char: Don’t fuck with me Bea, you used to take food from our fridge. Bea: Don’t bring that shit up. Char: Sorry. Sorry, I didn’t mean. I’m just... I really need this. I’ll do anything, honestly. Please. Bea: Look, I know how you/ Char: No you don’t! You’re not low rate! Bea: No, but/ Char: And Aaron, I bet he’s high too, right? What is he? Bea: Well he’s... Char: What is he? Some poor low rater? A little Charity case? No, what is he? Bea: You know you can’t get into bar training unless you’re/ Char: So what is he? Bea: 8.9, but/ Char: Wow/ Bea: But we don’t care about ratings, we just met. Char: But you’ve both got good blood. Exactly. Pause. In the next few years I’m going to begin the slow process of falling apart. I’ll disintegrate. I need this job so I don’t spend my last few years lying in a pool of my own/ Bea: OK! OK. OK. Long pause. I tested a 7.7 woman this morning. Propensity for diabetes, something else minor. Nothing scary. Is that about right? Char hugs her hard. Give me a minute. Bea exits. ___________ Excerpted from “The Phlebotomist.” Copyright © 2018 by Ella Road. Used with permission of Oberon Books. All rights reserved.