GROWING UP in Niger, Mdou Moctar listened to traditional Tuareg music. Women played the imzad, a one-stringed fiddle, and the goatskin tindé drum, while men trilled on the shepherd’s flute. Takamba and assouf, guitar-driven styles, were his favourite. “I wanted to play guitar, but couldn’t find one where I lived,” Mr Moctar says via email. “I made one by hand out of wood and bicycle cables.” He practised diligently even though, at the time, music was a creative hobby rather than a plausible career. “When I was young I wanted to become an engineer who digs wells,” Mr Moctar says. “We always need water in the desert.” Born in 1986, he was still young when the “desert blues” genre—a reference to the shared roots of the music of the Mississippi Delta and the West African desert—emerged. Ali Farka Touré entranced listeners with his superposition of different melodies on the guitar; in 1994 he won a Grammy for “Talking Timbuktu”, a collaboration with Ry Cooder, an American musician. Tinariwen, a collective from Mali formed in 1979, worked with traditional instruments in the assouf style, but added electrified sounds, pop influences and politicised lyrics.  Mr Moctar honed his craft performing at local weddings, and word got around that a young, left-handed guitar player was a rising star. He recorded an album, “Anar”, in Nigeria in 2008, combining droning guitars with drum-machine beats and the auto-tuned vocals favoured by Nigerian pop at the time. His lyrics, sung in his native Tamashek, were poetic and referred to the themes of heartbreak and melancholy typical of assouf: “My dream is to turn into a small bird to fly to her and kiss her between the eyebrows,” he sings on the title track (“anar” means “eyebrows”). The songs, traded via SIM cards, were hits. Christopher Kirkley, an American music writer, included them in his mixtape “Music from Saharan Cellphones”. In 2013 Mr Moctar released “Afelan”, an album of field recordings from the open-air concerts he played in his home village. It combined heartfelt, melodic songs, such as “Tahoultine” (which explored the perils of beauty), and frenetic guitar work, evident on “Issuahid Elwanme”. It displayed the two sides of his artistry, one bold and colourful and the other intimate and reverent. Well established at home, with Mr Kirkley’s help Mr Moctar gain international exposure in 2015 with “Akounak Tedalat Taha Tazoughai” (“Rain the Colour of Blue with a Little Red In It”), an adaptation of the film “Purple Rain”. Mr Moctar took on the role formerly inhabited by Prince, and he exhibits the same rebellious charisma as he rides his motorcycle through the desert of Agadez, guitar slung over his shoulder. The film and the soundtrack were praised on the film-festival circuit, positioning Mr Moctar as the next ambassador of Tuareg music. Though “Sousoume Tamachek” (2017), an EP on which he played every instrument, and “Blue Stage Session” (2019), a collection of live recordings, have highlighted Mr Moctar’s exceptional skill, it is “Ilana (The Creator)”, a new album released on March 29th, which shows his mastery of his craft. Recorded in a studio in Detroit and then finished in Niger, the band of experienced African musicians (and an American bassist) improvise in most songs. They layer elements of Western rock over the hypnotic, repeating rhythms of desert blues. “Takamba”, an instrumental track, combines funk-like grooves with psychedelic guitar phrases reminiscent of the 1960s; “Ilana” makes use of brilliant and dense fingerpicking as well as the power chords favoured in hard rock. With “Inizgam” Mr Moctar steps out of the desert mode entirely and toys with British blues-rock stylings reminiscent of Cream. The effect is both disorienting and ecstatic. Mr Moctar says he knows little about the classic rock canon: “I don't even know what rock is,” he maintains, “I just play what I sense and I understand”. He has picked up techniques and tricks, though. He began tapping—playing strings percussively on the fretboard—after watching videos of Eddie van Halen on YouTube (it is evident on “Tarhatazed”, the album’s centrepiece). He has professed a love for ZZ Top’s boogie rock. Mr Moctar plays a left-handed Fender guitar as did Jimi Hendrix, inviting a comparison of the two. Like Hendrix, he employs an unconventional and fearsome array of techniques as dreamlike passages give way to blazing and virtuosic solos. Listening to “Ilana” is an exhilarating experience, yet Mr Moctar is a thoughtful frontman. He says the album is about injustice and “suffering in the desert”, though the frenetic sounds occasionally overpower the lyrics. “In the song ‘Ilana’ I send a prayer to the creator for help for our women and children who are suffering,” he writes of the title track, which critiques French uranium mining; elsewhere, he muses about his displaced people and the exploitation of women’s labour. True to his roots, he makes room for some traditional love songs, too.