This is a by-invitation commentary as part of The Economist’s Open Future initiative, which is designed to spur a global conversation across the ideological spectrum on individual rights, markets and technology. You can comment here or on Facebook and Twitter. More articles can be found at Economist.com/openfuture. *       *      *  THE TECHNOLOGIES for genetic testing and enhancements are here, from embryo screening to genome editing. But not all of them are appropriate to living in a well-functioning society. For example, all pregnant women in Britain are offered a screening test for Down’s syndrome. Yet researchers believe they can screen embryos and identify the genes responsible for traits that are not diseases or disorders, such as intelligence and height. Clinics in America already offer clients information on whether an embryo is likely to develop into a person with a below average IQ. And the rollout of facial-predicting technology is said to be just a few years away. Soon clinics will be able to show parents an image of what each embryo will look like as a person. Some clinics in America already offer eye-colour selecting services. Some people might regard these developments as a straightforward liberal expansion of choice. Why not offer parents the opportunity to have the kind of child they desire? Having a higher IQ is statistically more likely to lead to better life outcomes, after all. If we already permit the testing for Down’s syndrome because we believe a child without this condition will have a better life, why not extend this justification beyond disorders to traits that might lead to better lives, such as musical ability, height or intelligence? However, to identify what, if anything, might be wrong with this kind of genetic selection, it is useful to question some of the assumptions behind this framing of the issue. First, disabilities. That we currently screen for Down’s syndrome should not be taken as an axiomatic and unproblematic starting point. Many disability-rights organisations oppose screening, as they believe it is inimical to adequately valuing the lives of the disabled. It is understandable that today, parents might choose to select against Down’s syndrome. People with this condition require greater care, and many will not be able to have ordinary jobs or live fully independent lives. Yet this could be improved by making changes to our institutions. Although there is certainly a medical-impairment aspect to disability, it also has a significant socially-imposed element to it—and this can be changed. Society could be arranged to make it easier for people to live with or care for those with disabilities, by improving care arrangements and accessibility to services. Given the lack of support, it seems inevitable that having a child with Down’s syndrome is stressful and strenuous. The structures just aren’t in place for it to be any other way. Second, intelligence. We ought to question why it is that IQ is such a predictor of life outcomes—and whether this is right. High IQ influences life outcomes because it is correlated with wealth, and it is correlated with wealth because one’s wealth is often determined by one’s job. Wealth is essential to maintaining good nutrition and a healthy lifestyle, which contributes to overall wellbeing. Yet we ought to question whether it is right that intelligence, wealth and the job we hold determine life outcomes so much in the first place. That is something which should be addressed, rather than reified. Third, appearance. Evidence suggests that those who are perceived as more attractive are more successful. There is also a “halo effect” that causes one trait (like perceived beauty) to drastically alter our perception of other traits. If we think someone is attractive, we are also likely to assume they’re smart, ambitious and interesting, as well as kinder and friendlier. Why not give your child the best chance in life by maximising the possibility that they are seen this way? However, perceived attractiveness is heavily influenced by our social and cultural norms, and it might be a bad idea to reinforce them if they tend to exclude people or privilege certain appearances (such as being white or thin). We ought to be seeking to remove such biases, rather than entrenching their hold on our decision-making and interactions with others. Women remain judged on their appearance more so than men, so it seems plausible to hypothesise that “facial-predicting selection” would be used more frequently with female embryos, furthering the notion that a woman’s value is derived from her looks. The advocate for these technologies is likely to respond that these problems can be avoided if we simply make it so that everyone were genetically enhanced. This way, there would not be significant variation in disease or IQ or appearance, and therefore not much variation in life outcomes based on these things. Yet a more egalitarian approach would seek to minimise the differences that these features have on people’s lives at all, by changing societies’ institutions and structures so that life outcomes weren’t so dictated by these factors. At this point, advocates might respond that it should be up to individuals alone if they wanted to make use of such technology, and many could choose the status quo and simply opt out. Yet the widespread introduction of these technologies would radically alter the status quo, and thus change the nature of the choice, from an exception to something that is seemingly ordinary and unobjectionable. It is important to consider who is driving this social change, and whether it is sufficiently democratic and representative. The scientists developing the technologies come from a small sub-section of society and may not be best placed to sympathise with or understand the concerns of those on the margins of society Further, researchers are not always beholden to states for funding (which can influence what gets worked on). They often receive private capital. We need to consider whether it is right that a small number of unrepresentative, rich funders and scientists are able to implement technologies that have the ability to radically alter society in unprecedented ways. Political philosophers have long been concerned with this perceived injustice: that natural talents can have such a bearing on the kind of life one has. It is often argued that justice requires that we make amends for inequalities that result from factors such as health, IQ and appearance that individuals themselves cannot control. John Rawls, an American moral philosopher who passed away in 2002, argued that life is often a lottery; nature deals us a certain hand, regarding our genetics, talents and social circumstances. As these facets of our identity are ascribed by the luck of the draw, we cannot be said to deserve them. According to Rawls, the fairest society would be one that any one of us would be happy to endorse if we did not know the hand that we were going to be dealt, how healthy or clever we were going to be. Such a society would be fair to all, no matter what these features of our identity were. Behind the debate over genetic enhancement is the idea that some lives or traits are not as desirable—a view that would be reinforced by the state and its health industries. This affects how we all view each other, particularly those who may deviate from a new genetically-selected “norm”. While eradicating serious genetic diseases in order to improve well-being is a noble pursuit, we should be wary of extending this reasoning to arguments for creating “enhanced” people. If well-being is dictated by traits such as beauty and IQ, we need to think seriously about whether this is as it should be, and work towards addressing the social conditions that allow this to be the case. It would be far better for society to ensure that well-being doesn’t differ drastically amongst people of different IQ and income levels. This could be done by seeing that universal public services are up to scratch and enabling people to live rich, healthy lives regardless of their wealth. Advocates of genetic enhancement have seemingly identified an injustice: that traits such as intelligence enable people to live “better” lives. However, instead of locating this injustice in the institutional arrangements that allow such inequalities to flourish, supporters of genetic enhancement end up perpetuating the idea that it is acceptable for such differences to dictate outcomes. We would do well to remember that we are all only ever temporarily abled—each one of us is prone to illness and injury, and we all depend on others for care at some point in our lives. Retaining a more empathetic approach, predicated on the belief that every human life is valuable, is crucial for ensuring a well-functioning society that works for the benefit of all. ____________ Gulzaar Barn is a postdoctoral research associate at King's College London. Her work explores the ethical dimensions of scientific advances, perspectives on the body and theories of justice. Earlier, she was a postgraduate research fellow at the Parliamentary Office of Science and Technology.