JUAN GUAIDÓ, recognised by most Western and Latin American democracies as Venezuela’s interim president, seems to have decided it was now or never to claim real power. In the early morning of April 30th he stood outside the La Carlota air-force base in Caracas, the capital, to proclaim that Operación Libertad, or Operation Liberty, the final push to free Venezuela from the dictatorial regime of Nicolás Maduro, had begun. A few signs suggested that Mr Guaidó, who is supported by millions of Venezuelans suffering from regime-inflicted hunger and other hardships, might have the sort of backing needed to remove it. A video showed him surrounded by a small group of soldiers wearing blue armbands, signalling support for his movement. Some armoured cars were parked behind them. More important, Mr Guaidó was joined by Leopoldo López, once the country’s most popular opposition leader, who had been jailed in 2014 and later placed under house arrest. He said he had been freed by agents from SEBIN, Venezuela’s intelligence service, who had been keeping him under guard. That suggests that his jailers, at least, had switched sides. Videos appeared of small groups of armed men joining protesters against the regime. Mr Guaidó declared that “brave soldiers...have followed our call.” But for Mr Guaidó to wrest power from Mr Maduro, troops will have to defect in large numbers, and that is likely to happen only if their commanders do, too. Rumours of high-level defections circulated throughout the morning. Questions revolved around Manuel Figuera, the general in charge of SEBIN, who has not been heard from.  In the afternoon the United States’ national-security adviser, John Bolton, suggested that more high-level defections were expected. He asserted that "key figures in the regime” had been “talking to the opposition over these last three months” and called on them to “make good on their commitments to achieve the peaceful transfer of power from the Maduro clique” to Mr Guaidó. Among those prepared to defect, he asserted, were the defence minister, Vladimir Padrino López, the supreme court’s chief justice, Maikel Moreno, and the commander of the presidential guard, Iván Rafael Hernández Dala.” All of them “agreed that Maduro had to go,” Mr Bolton claimed. He told them to “act this afternoon or this evening to help bring other military forces” to Mr Guaidó’s side.  Whether these regime stalwarts had indeed agreed to dump Mr Maduro is unclear. Certainly, the United States has long wanted them to. By, in effect, declaring them to be disloyal to the regime, Mr Bolton may be hoping to force them to take action against it.  Before his intervention, most of the people popularly thought to be high-level rebels appeared to have confirmed their loyalty to the regime. José Ornellas, the chief of the armed forces, whom unsubstantiated reports said was the leader of the rebellion, tweeted his backing for Mr Maduro. So did Mr Padrino López. Some informed observers think the rising went off at half-cock: it had been planned for another day, with the support of senior officers, but was brought forward because the regime was about to arrest Mr Guaidó and the coup plotters then backed down. Mr Bolton asserted that the Cubans, who spy on the Venezuelan armed forces and feed the intelligence to Mr Maduro, “played a very significant role in propping Maduro up today, possibly with help from the Russians”. The most senior officer known to have joined the rebellion seems to be a lieutenant-colonel of the National Guard charged with guarding the opposition-controlled national assembly. The protesters around Mr Guaidó failed to enter the La Carlota base. They were fended off by rounds of teargas. The repression appeared to turn brutal. Images on social media showed a National Guard armoured car running over demonstrators. By late morning Diosdado Cabello, perhaps the regime’s second-most-powerful figure, was declaring that “the traitors to the country have once again been defeated”. For now, it looks as if Mr Guaidó is left with the tactic of mobilising opposition on the streets, until now his main way of putting pressure on the regime. He has called for the largest demonstration in Venezuela’s history to take place on May 1st. Radicals are urging Mr Guaidó to head directly towards the presidential palace. Others warn that may be a futile gesture: routes to the palace are easily blocked by loyalist security forces. In short, events in Venezuela remain unpredictable. It is still too soon for the regime to declare victory. It is unclear what effect, if any, Mr Bolton’s claim to be outing top regime officials will have. Mr Maduro himself has not appeared in public. The march may well be yet another reminder to exasperated citizens that whereas Mr Guaidó has the popular support, the president still has the guns.  If so, the initiative may soon pass to the regime. Its first decision will be whether to allow Mr Guaidó, to remain free. (Mr López and his family have found refuge at the Chilean embassy.) The government has so far permitted Mr Guaidó to agitate largely unmolested, no doubt in part because the United States has warned of reprisals if he is arrested. Until the events of April 30th, the regime had tried to avoid killing people at recent protests. If they swell it may begin to repress them more forcibly. Another possibility is that the opposition will lose heart. Mr Guaidó’s last big gambit—an attempt in February to bring in humanitarian aid from Colombia watched by the world’s media—was a failure. Another could demoralise the opposition. The United States and most Latin American countries have given Mr Guaidó full-throated support. This has been backed by American sanctions on Venezuela’s vital oil industry. President Donald Trump has now threatened a “full and complete embargo” against Cuba, blaming it for helping to keep Mr Maduro in power. But the pressure has yet to break the regime. It is not clear how many setbacks Mr Guaidó and his allies can tolerate. 