Warning: this article contains some details of “Killing Eve” season two THE CAST of the 25th James Bond film, Daniel Craig’s final outing as 007, has been the subject of much speculation of late. Rami Malek, fresh from a Best Actor win at the Oscars, is tipped to be the movie’s villain; Léa Seydoux and Ralph Fiennes are expected to reprise their roles from “Spectre”. After some speculation that Lupita Nyong’o would star as the “Bond girl”—more often than not a bit part involving being bedded and bumped off—Coral, a betting firm, recently announced that Jodie Comer was the frontrunner for the job based on her turn in “Killing Eve”. Luke Jennings, the creator of the “Codename Villanelle” spy novels on which the hit show is based, took to Twitter to argue that it would be a “step down” for Ms Comer. Indeed, the actress—who stars as Villanelle, a talented Russian assassin—is already part of a much more interesting production. In many ways, “Killing Eve” is the antithesis of Bond. Mr Jennings, though an avid reader of Ian Fleming’s books, thought that the thriller genre had become “stale”. “Today’s male thriller heroes are, almost without exception, humourless bores,” he wrote, who salivate over fancy cars and technology. “Why not turn the genre on its head?” That meant female leads who are not damsels in distress but clever and good at their jobs. Eve Polastri (Sandra Oh), the MI6 officer tasked with tracking Villanelle down, is instinctive and determined; Carolyn Martens (Fiona Shaw), her boss, is puzzlingly wily. Villanelle is an excellent international hitwoman partly because she’s proficient in several languages. She takes pride in executing her assigned kills with flair. Where Bond kills for queen and country, Villanelle does it mostly because she’s good at it. He usually bludgeons his targets to death and relies on fancy gadgets, while she is creative in her murderous means (spraying an asphyxiating perfume, for example). Whereas he might pose as a valet or a security guard, Villanelle—who loves the theatricality of a costume—exploits the service jobs typically reserved for women, such as nursing, waitressing or sex work, to gain access to her victims. As a result, Villanelle’s prey do not see this petite blonde woman as a threat until they are already bleeding from their femoral artery. It is an idea “Killing Eve” takes further in the second season with the introduction of another shadowy figure, “the kind of woman who people look at every day and never see”. The show takes clichés of the thriller genre and tinkers with them. Sexually, the women are in control. Villanelle seduces and manipulates both men and women according to her whims, while Carolyn is revealed to have played two Russian operatives off each other. Yet the sex these characters have is rarely titillating. Villanelle, almost fully clothed, is visibly bored during one encounter; Eve would rather talk about work than make love with her husband. Instead it is the overtly erotic relationship between Eve and Villanelle that drives the narrative. “Killing Eve” alludes to the dead and mutilated women of Bond, as well as those in shows such as “True Detective” and “Mindhunter”. In the first season, Villanelle takes out Frank, a mole in MI6, and leaves his corpse on the bed à la “Goldfinger”: he is wearing one of Eve’s dresses, and has had his penis cut off. The viewer learns that Villanelle also murdered and castrated the husband of a previous lover. It is a young man who, enamoured with Villanelle after their fling, takes a fatal sniff of her Novichok perfume. Yet what truly sets “Killing Eve” apart from other thrillers is its playfulness. The script, written by Phoebe Waller-Bridge in season one and now penned by Emerald Fennell, is razor-sharp. The characters’ speech is naturalistic rather than suave. Random interludes about rats on the street or face cream made from pigs’ placenta create bathos and leaven the tone whenever it threatens to become too serious. Villanelle’s grand deceptions often require small humiliations as well: as a lover of Balenciaga, Molly Goddard and Miu Miu, wearing someone else’s sweaty hospital shoes to make a getaway is a source of disgust and shame. This self-awareness, a willingness to poke fun at itself, is part of what makes “Killing Eve” so entertaining. The writers know that Villanelle does not look like a formidable killer and that Eve, as an Asian-American woman with great hair, is a departure from the charming Englishman spy. At MI6, one character notes, there’s “an old Etonian around every corner ready to steal your job”. Quite the opposite. Eve’s and Villanelle’s capers make Bond’s look boring.