ONE OF THE historical functions of England’s established church is to speak for the whole nation, including those of other faiths and none, at times of collective rejoicing, remembrance, mourning or fear. To some extent, the Church of England continues to play this role, for example at royal weddings or in acts of remembrance for fallen soldiers. But what is the Archbishop of Canterbury, who heads both the Church of England and the worldwide Anglican Communion, supposed to do when the nation is bitterly divided, and the split runs down the middle of his own flock? Justin Welby’s dilemma over Brexit is all the more difficult because he was a declared Remain voter in the June 2016 referendum, while 66% of self-identified Anglicans opted for Brexit. As the deadline for Brexit looms and recedes, the Anglican leader has used his influence in two main ways: to argue against a no-deal Brexit on grounds that it would exacerbate social dislocation and poverty, and to plead for a spirit of national reconciliation through courteous conversation. Local churches have been urged to host “informal cafe-style meetings” and invite people of all persuasions to “get together and chat over a cup of tea and pray for our country and our future.” Archbishop Welby and his Ugandan-born colleague, Archbishop John Sentamu of York, have jointly issued a package of prayers, Bible passages and “questions designed to prompt conversations” over Britain’s future, whatever it might be. If the language, from a chuch immortalised in film and literature for its garden fetes and genteel village gatherings, contains a hint of self-parody, the concerns at the highest level of Britain’s spiritual establishment are very real. Archbishop Welby (ex officio a member of the Privy Council, an inner circle of senior office-holders with access to sensitive information) is known to be worried about local food shortages and a breakdown of public order in the event of a chaotic exit from the European Union. But he also acknowledged, at least indirectly, that the people most at risk from Brexit include those who have been demanding it most loudly. In a recent address to the General Synod, one of the senior organs of his church, he said the surge of pro-Brexit sentiment was a cry of protest which must be heard. Yet some of the clergy under Archbishop Welby’s sway observe the same “pain and exclusion” and come to very different conclusions. Giles Fraser, an Anglican cleric who is a prominent figure on the religious and intellectual left, is a convinced supporter of leaving what he sees as the capitalist European club. “The emotional core of Brexit, and the reason I remain a passionate Brexiter, despite all its problems, is that it seeks to collapse the distance between power and ordinary people,” he wrote recently. And in a very different corner of British Christianity, the smallish world of zealous fundamentalism, the sentiment in favour of Brexit is often no less passionate, but very different in tone. During a recent pro-Leave march, a white-haired lady carried a placard which was widely and approvingly shared by evangelicals on social media: As for England’s Catholics, they opted for Brexit in slightly greater numbers (55%) than the nation as a whole, but they are less wedded to the little-England ideal than are rank-and-file Anglicans. Crux, a well-informed Catholic news agency, said the great majority of senior Catholic clergy oppose Brexit, although they have been coy about saying so in public. Instead they have stressed the fact that Britain will remain committed to Europe through other institutions, including the Council of Europe and the European Convention on Human Rights. The unexpectedly high number of Catholic voters in the Brexit camp is probably explained by the high concentration of that community in the Brexit-lands of northern England. Catholic churches are much fuller in London, but many of the Brazilians, Filipinos and Nigerians who throng the capital’s churches are outsiders to the British political process. In any case, wherever they stand in that process, religious professionals generally gave a thumbs-down to the attempt by Boris Johnson, the former foreign secretary and exuberant Brexiteer, to invoke Biblical language in favour of leaving as quickly as possible. He thundered: “It is time for the Prime Minister to channel the spirit of Moses in Exodus and say to Pharaoh in Brussels: let my people go.”  There are many ways to describe Britain’s relationship to the European Union, but the slavery of the children of Israel in Egypt doesn’t quite seem apt. Nor have champions of the Brexit cause been honest enough to prepare the newly-liberated people for the 40 years of wandering in a dry, stony desert which the children of Israel had to endure.