THE UNITED STATES COMMISSION ON INTERNATIONAL RELIGIOUS FREEDOM (USCIRF) is concerned about extremism, and with good reason—but not quite (or not only) in the way you might think. The focus of a briefing paper issued by the commission, an advisory body appointed by Congress and the White House to monitor liberty of conscience, is not on violent extremism as such. Rather it is concerned with the way that sloppy charges of “extremism” are used ever more often by authoritarian regimes to clamp down hard on almost any religious group which, for some reason, they don’t like. China, Russia and Tajikistan are mentioned as examples. The fact that murderous, religiously motivated extremism, whether in Nigeria, the Middle East or the Western world, does pose a real, acute problem makes the cynical or tactical use of the e-word all the easier. So too, the paper notes, does the existence of certain loopholes in the international agreements which affirm basic human entitlements. For example, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, which entered force in 1976, says freedom of religion can be limited by states in the ways “necessary to protect public safety, order, health, or morals or the fundamental rights and freedoms of others.” Those rather generous exceptions can all too easily become a persecutors’ charter, especially if the people being targeted can be branded, on some ground or other, as extremist. But the commission makes a clear-headed case against such abuses. “Where religious freedom and related rights are not protected, violent extremism is more likely to spread,” it argues. It follows that any limitation on religious freedom in the name of say, public order, must be “particularly narrow” and avoid blanket prohibitions of beliefs or religious movements. “Without clear limits, virtually any speech or religious activity could be prosecuted. Anti-extremism laws must be formulated with enough clarity to allow individuals to regulate their conduct, and cannot be vague and lead to unforeseeable application.” For a purist advocate of freedom of conscience, even those guidelines might sound as though they concede too much to the authoritarians. But it is clear enough what the USCIRF is arguing against. Among the most egregious misuses of the e-word is China’s policy vis-à-vis the Uighur Muslims in the country’s north-west. Hundreds of thousands of Uighurs have been sent to so-called re-education centres; when challenged about this in forums like the UN Human Rights Council, China always retorts that these detentions are part of an anti-extremism policy. Many manifestations of Muslim belief, from female veils to long beards to the leading of an abstemious life, are taken as evidence of “extremist” views. In Russia, meanwhile, the Jehovah’s Witnesses, along with certain pietistic forms of Islam, have been targeted by the authorities under a crackdown on perceived extremism which is being followed with alarm by secular human-rights monitors. Jehovah’s Witnesses have been arrested and put on trial in places ranging from Crimea, which was annexed by Russia in 2014, to the heart of Siberia. In February seven members of the sect were arrested in the Siberian city of Surgut and subjected to torture, which included beating, suffocation and electric shocks. This week a follower in Oryol was convicted of “participating in an extremist group” and fined the equivalent of $5,000; prosecutors wanted a three-year jail term. A Danish follower of the sect in the same city has been jailed for six years. For all the eccentricity of their beliefs, nobody has ever seriously accused the Jehovah’s Witnesses of preparing to use force. In Tajikistan, the USCIRF noted, the authorities have been repressing all forms of Islam except the officially sanctioned one. Male beards and female headscarves are treated as evidence of adherence to Salafism, a purist form of Islam that is outlawed in Tajikistan. That particular belief can take violent forms, but by no means always does so. In Saudi Arabia, which many see as the cradle of Salafism, the authorities’ favourite word is not “extremism” but “counter-terrorism”, a concept that can be used to criminalise “virtually all forms of peaceful dissent”, as the USCIRF observed. In Western democracies, as well as in manifestly authoritarian places, there is a temptation to blur the distinction between idiosyncratic belief and the sort of “extremism” that poses a real threat to public safety. In France and Germany, for example, it is not actually illegal to be a Salafi, but the authorities do assume that it is a step on a road that could lead in a violent direction. The police keep a careful eye on individuals of that persuasion, to the dismay of more peaceful types. Britain, meanwhile, has a contentious set of policies whose declared aim is “preventing violent extremism”—an approach that carefully includes both white-nativist conspiracies and the Islamist sort, and also rests on the belief that “non-violent extremism” (such as ultra-conservative Islamic theology) could be a gateway to terror. Politically active British Muslims complain that an entire faith is being stigmatised, to which the authorities reply that they are doing their best to avoid that very thing. In contrast with repressive states, discussions within democratic countries about how exactly to define extremism are usually conducted in a more-or-less transparent way. But things can get really messy when the “extremism” language of an authoritarian state starts to influence the deliberations of a democratic one. Something like that has happened to Britain as it ponders under strong Saudi and Emirati pressure whether to proscribe the global Muslim Brotherhood. A British government report in 2014 conceded that the Brotherhood could sometimes be a gateway to violence, while a parliamentary panel retorted that, on the contrary, the movement could be a “firewall” against extremism. In the United States, too, there have been high-level arguments over where to draw the line between terrorist groups and idiosyncratic or militant forms of belief; and the Muslim Brotherhood has been the focus of one such argument. But at least the American constitution’s guarantees of free speech, and its prohibition of anything that implies the existence of a state religion, is a guarantee against the careless use of the e-word. Even in an age where tolerance for idiosyncratic or vulnerable minorities may be diminishing, the American system and its institutional guardians uphold the right to follow your conscience in what you think, say and believe.