FOR BOTH the Irish and the Greek-Cypriots, at opposite geographical extremes of the European Union, this is a time of year when you expect to hear acrimonious debates about some sensitive moments of national history. These include the circumstances in which people on each island rose up against British rule. Ireland has often mingled its religious commemorations of Jesus Christ’s resurrection with events that recall the Easter Rising in 1916. Meanwhile the Greek-Cypriots hold ceremonies that recall the formal start of their violent campaign to end British domination, and if possible unite the island with Greece, on April 1st 1955. In some respects, historical discussions in the two countries sound remarkably similar. In each place, people argue about the roles, sometimes complementary and sometimes competing, played by armed anti-British resistance and the national church, both of which claimed to be the moral representative of a hard-pressed people. And in both islands, people wonder whether territorial partition could have been avoided if demands for freedom had been pursued in a different way. In Ireland, there was a deeply ambivalent relationship between the Catholic church and the Republican movement that emerged in the 19th century. The leaders of the rebellion which engulfed Dublin in 1916, who in 16 cases were executed, included devout Catholics who entrusted new Irish republic to the care “of the most high God”. Yet their action was condemned by some Catholic bishops. In later years, generations of Irish schoolchildren were taught to see a link between the re-emergence of Jesus Christ from the grave and the self-sacrifice of the rebels which led to the rebirth of the Irish nation. But hard-core Irish republicans, who tend to be secular, dismiss such talk as sentimental, or as a cynical attempt by the church to jump on their revolutionary bandwagon. For militant Irish republicans, one of the many bad consequences of the partition of Ireland between an independent south and a British north was that it cleared the way for the southern state to be ultra-Catholic in its public ethos, leaving little room for religious minorities and people of no religion. Conservative Irish nationalists would disagree. In certain ways, that argument is still sputtering on. Sinn Fein, the political voice of Irish republicanism, has recently shown its secular face by taking a firm line in favour of gay rights and a liberal abortion regime in both parts of Ireland, to the point of virtually forcing members who dissent from this line, on grounds of Catholic conscience, to leave the party. A decade or so ago, Sinn Fein might have hesitated to take this uncompromisingly secularist stance for fear of alienating devout Catholic voters; but it now calculates that any political cost is bearable because the church’s authority has waned. But to see a really tortured, and still contentious, relationship between an armed rebel movement and a Christian church, consider the modern history of Cyprus. The campaign by the island’s ethnic Greek majority to expel the British, who had ruled the island as a protectorate since 1878 and as a crown colony since 1925, drew on two contrasting kinds of rhetoric: the anti-colonial militancy that was gaining ground all over the world, and the much more conservative ethos of Greek nationalism and irredentism. The most visible leader of the Greek-Cypriots in the 1950s was Archbishop Makarios (pictured), the head of the national church, who later became the first president of the Cyprus republic. The cleric always kept his own relationship with the EOKA fighters in a kind of mysterious grey area. But in the eyes of their British enemies and their ethnic Greek admirers, the prelate and the guerrillas were, at least in the early days, co-leaders of a single cause. However close the relationship was at the start, it turned sour in the 1960s, with consequences that are still with us. But things evolved in a way that was almost the mirror image of what happened in Ireland. The hard core of EOKA guerrillas hewed to the political right. They were led by a Greek-trained, ultra-rightist officer, George Grivas, who was furious with the archbishop for accepting a compromise (Cyprus becoming an independent bi-communal state co-managed by Greeks and Turks) as opposed to fighting on for the maximal aim of union with Athens. The archbishop, meanwhile, seemed to swing to the international left by cultivating the non-aligned movement, opposing NATO and prompting American cold-warriors to dub him the Castro of the Mediterranean. In the end, ultra-rightist and Greek-nationalist forces in Athens and Cyprus colluded to overthrow him, albeit briefly, in July 1974. That in turn prompted Turkey to invade the island, citing the need to protect the Turkish-Cypriot minority; there was a massive, forced exchange of population and the island was partitioned. Although the memory of Archbishop Makarios is generally revered among Greek-Cypriots, they still argue over whether the charismatic cleric bears some responsibility for triggering the island’s violent partition. This week Takis Hadjidemetriou, a veteran Greek-Cypriot politician respected for his work in reconciling Greek- and Turkish-Cypriots, published an assessment of the 1950s. He argued that the archbishop to some degree created his own nemesis by choosing Grivas as a tactical ally in the 1950s. Teaming up with the old-time Greek nationalist, and blessing his “armed struggle”, was a conscious, deliberate and avoidable choice by the archbishop, in the politician’s view. Things might have been better if the archbishop had from the beginning focused his energies more exclusively on an anti-colonial campaign, Mr Hadjidemetriou believes. In Cyprus, more than in Ireland, it could be argued that the church has had the last word. Although nobody could now imagine political and religious leadership being fused in a single person, the island’s church retains huge wealth and quiet influence in Cypriot affairs. It has recently exercised its power in a conservative way; the days when its leader, Makarios, was known internationally as the “red bishop” are long gone. Although different prelates take different views, the church has in the last few years resisted proposals for a compromise solution between Greek- and Turkish-Cypriots. And in Cyprus as well as in Greece, politicians sometimes skirmish with the church but they generally avoid a final showdown because the cost would be too high; a large proportion of voters still feel protective of their traditional faith and its guardians. That no longer seems to be the case in Ireland.