THE TRAILER for “PM Narendra Modi” is intended to be stirring. Supporters chant the prime minister’s name, and throng around him, trying to shake his hand. There is emotive music as he addresses a crowd stood atop a car, or strides across a plain to stare into the sun. There are sweeping shots of snow-clad mountains and azure waters as well as flashes of guns, motorbikes and marches. Those two and a half minutes are all that Indian audiences have been able to see so far. The film was due to be released on April 11th, the first day of voting in the general election, but has been mired in legal disputes. The Delhi High Court approved the release of the film, and the Central Board of Film Certification had few complaints. But the Election Commission (EC) watched the biopic and declared that it had “several scenes depicting a major opposition party as corrupt and showing them in poor light”, and that any film “which has the potential to disturb the level playing field during the elections should not be displayed”. A web series, called “Modi: Journey of a Common Man”, has also been banned, along with “Lakshmi’s NTR” and “Udyama Simham”, two biopics of founders of regional political parties. The EC recommended delaying the release of the film until May 19th, when voting concludes. The Supreme Court upheld that recommendation last week.  “PM Narendra Modi” has proven controversial for its hagiographic tone and its apparent willingness to tinker with the truth. It is a depiction of a man who rose from humble tea-seller (there are no official records to support this) to hold India’s top job. The trailer shows Modi (played by Vivek Oberoi, a popular actor), in helpless despair during the rioting in Gujarat in 2002, when at least 1,000 people were killed, most of them Muslims. Mr Modi was chief minister of the state at the time, and his critics have argued that he did not do enough to stop the massacre. He has never condemned the events or apologised for them. Indeed, if the short reel is any indication, “PM Narendra Modi” shows its subject to be entirely flawless. It is billed as a celebration of Mr Modi’s “remarkable courage, wisdom, patience, dedication to his people, his acumen as a political strategist [and] his leadership that inspired a thousand social changes in Gujarat and later India”. Mr Oberoi rarely does anything other than strive to appear pensive behind his white beard, and utter such clichés as “if you wish to change the country’s fate, first, you will have to face your own destiny.” One absurd sequence shows a young Modi inexplicably caught in an exchange of gunfire between the Indian army and some kind of terrorist group. He risks his life to raise the Indian flag. The ban on “PM Narendra Modi” will do nothing to damage the cult surrounding the leader, and Mr Modi needs little help with publicity. In one interview, when asked about a cross-border air strike conducted by the Indian army in February, he claimed that he “went to Pakistan and killed the terrorists” himself. Last week, in a filmed chat with Akshay Kumar, a Bollywood superstar, both men stressed how “non-political” the conversation was (that it took place during election season was entirely coincidental). It was an attempt to bring out the lighter side of the chest-thumping leader, and Mr Modi responded genially to scripted questions about mangoes (he loves them) and sleep (never more than three and a half hours a night). “PM Narendra Modi” fits into a larger self-aggrandising narrative. That will matter little to audiences: movies that favour the ruling party have found viewers of late. “The Accidental Prime Minister” (2019), a film satirising Manmohan Singh, a former leader from the opposition Congress party, performed reasonably well at the box office. “Uri” dramatised the so-called “surgical strike” by the Indian army on Pakistan-controlled Kashmir in 2016, and is the highest-grossing Bollywood film this year. “My Name is RaGa” is currently in production, a film that, judging from its trailer, seems to mock the Congress party’s president, Rahul Gandhi. For all its cinematic flaws, “PM Narendra Modi” promises to be a hit among “Modi bhakts”, fans of the prime minister who support him unquestioningly. When it is finally released, viewers will no doubt erupt into cheers, whistles and standing ovations. The true story of one of India’s most powerful, colourful and divisive personalities is yet to be told.