MANY FEMALE Surrealist painters resented being defined by their gender. They found group exhibitions that lumped “women artists” together in a separate category—as if they were not inspired by the same ideas as their male counterparts—to be demeaning. Leonor Fini wrote that “men have tried to exile, to imprison, women. A study exclusively devoted to women is still a sort of exile.” Dorothea Tanning held a similar opinion. “Women artists. There is no such thing—or person,” she once said. “It’s just as much a contradiction in terms as ‘man artist’ or ‘elephant artist’. You may be a woman and you may be an artist; but the one is a given and the other is you.” The label is an uneasy one, but it is difficult to discard—partly because many celebrated male Surrealists expressed misogynist views either on the canvas, where they sliced and diced the female form, or in print (André Breton, in one of his Manifestos, reckoned that “the problem of woman is the most marvellous and disturbing problem in all the world”). The term also points to the reasons why their work has been overlooked. A new show at the Tate Modern is the first large-scale solo exhibition of Tanning’s work anywhere in 25 years. The choice of venue is poignant: Frieze magazine recently reported that less than one-fifth of the Tate Modern’s permanent International Surrealists collection is by women. Tanning was born in Illinois in 1918 and moved to New York in 1936. There she met Max Ernst, a Surrealist and pioneer of the Dada movement (they were married for 30 years), and began a seven-decade career that encompassed painting, sculpture, poetry and prose. Her art is a strange delight. Amorphous bodies dance and twist across canvases, with flashes of bright colour. Dogs with childlike faces peer out of frames; unreal flowers bloom; girls stand with their feet on the ground as their hair gets sucked up into the sky. Symbols—chess games, bloated stomachs, doors—recur. In one of her paintings, a woman stands barefoot, her hand on a door-knob. One ajar door leads to another, and so on; where they lead cannot be seen. The figure wears an open jacket that exposes her breasts, and a skirt that at first looks like it is made out of branches, but is actually a web of squirming, tiny, green humanoid beings. An unrecognisable creature crouches before her, its wings outstretched. This work, “Birthday” (pictured, top left), a self-portrait Tanning painted in 1942, is viewed by many critics as depicting the moment she was “born” as a Surrealist. Yet Tanning saw herself as both part of the Surrealism movement and separate from it, and her art revels and thrills in her contradictions. She painted domestic spaces that expanded into the realm of the imaginary; the doors she depicted so frequently, in works such as “Birthday” and “Maternity” (1966, pictured top right)—where a door stands on its own, wide open, in an arid desert—usually lead nowhere. The viewer is never guided to a clear answer about what her symbolism means. “My dearest wish,” she once said of her uncanny work, is “to make a trap with no exit at all”. Though much of her work is beautiful to look at, it also has a nightmarish quality. Tanning said she was “forever corrupted” by the Gothic novelists, such as Poe and Walpole, whom she read while working in a public library in her small Illinois hometown. It was a place where “nothing happened but the wallpaper”, where “you sat on the davenport and waited to grow up”. Decades later, she created an installation called “Hôtel du Pavot, Chambre 202” (1970-73, pictured), in which the burgundy wallpaper in a grim-looking hotel room is ripped open and distorted pink bodies, sewn from cloth, burst through the walls. It is horrifying yet somehow familiar: Tanning said that she wanted the scene to have an “old banality”. She excelled at exploiting the eeriness of everyday life and creating a sense of the uncanny. Her sculptures, made with an old Singer sewing machine, subvert the idea of sewing as a “feminine” craft used to make objects that are domestic or dainty. Instead they are monstrous, grotesque and often cheeky. One, called “Tweedy”, is a small creature fashioned out of tweed—a tiny tweed poo sits neatly alongside it. Another, named “Emma” (after Gustave Flaubert’s tragic protagonist in “Madame Bovary”, who wanted to transcend the banality of domesticity), is a disembodied round belly. Its cartoon-pink flesh is swaddled in a skirt made from grubby antique lace, the delicacy of which is in stark opposition to the bulbous lump it surrounds. When she started making these stuffed creations in the late 1960s, people warned her that the fabric wouldn’t last. Her riposte was poetic: “When you fall in love, you don’t ask, ‘how long will you live?’” The worries were clearly misplaced: this exhibition proves that her weird and wonderful visions endure. They enthral in part because their meaning is so difficult to pin down, provoking new questions with every viewing. Her contradictory impulses—regarding the Surrealist movement, “female” subject matter and the act of painting itself—result in work that is, to twist Breton’s words, “marvellous and disturbing”. She is a true master of the surreal. “Dorothea Tanning” is showing at Tate Modern until June 9th