PROFESSIONAL GOLFERS ply their trade the whole year round, but the sport only kicks into gear fully in early April, when the Masters—the first of the four annual major tournaments—gets underway. The event’s adopted slogan, “a tradition unlike any other”, is a fair claim. The Masters is by far the most popular event on the golfing calendar, drawing nearly twice as large a television audience in the United States as its peers do. It is the most exclusive of the game’s marquee events, fielding around 90 players rather than the standard 156, though all former champions receive a permanent invitation to participate every year—no matter how old they are. It is the only one of the four majors played at the same venue every year: the Augusta National golf club, an institution so set in its ways it refused to admit women as members until 2012. And the garish green jacket presented to each Masters victor is seen as so precious that even the champion himself cannot keep it in his closet permanently. Instead, he can sport it only during the year of his reign. Afterwards, he must return it to Augusta National, and can wear it only when visiting the club. In the run-up to most tournaments in individual sports, attention from fans and media focuses mainly on the top handful of players. Not so in 2019, when the lion’s share of golfing discussion has focused on a competitor who does not even figure among the top ten in the official world rankings. Of course, that golfer happens to be named Tiger Woods, who at his best was the greatest player the sport has ever seen. After losing nearly a decade to injuries and scandal, Mr Woods has mounted an impressive comeback during the past year. In September he won his first official event since 2013, and he was among the leaders on the final day of both of the past two major tournaments. Betting markets currently give him a healthy 5% chance of claiming his 15th major crown at Augusta this year, trailing only the top three on the official rankings (Justin Rose, Dustin Johnson and Rory McIlroy).  However, the public’s rediscovered affection for Mr Woods—now seen as a scrappy underdog rather than a reckless, entitled superstar—may be clouding the markets’ judgment. Since 2016 The Economist has produced a statistical prediction model for men’s major golf tournaments called EAGLE (Economist Advantage in Golf Likelihood Estimator). It calculates each player’s probability of winning an event based on his past performance; the configuration and scoring history of the course; and, once a tournament begins, all of the results recorded so far. In the past, EAGLE has only appeared as a projected leaderboard. This year, however, we are pleased to display all of its predictions on a new, interactive data-visualisation site. EAGLE takes Mr Woods’s comeback seriously, but maintains far more caution than punters are showing. As our article in this week’s print edition  shows, the current version of Mr Woods is not only a shadow of his former self, but is also inferior to many other modern golfers with far thinner résumés. For a 43-year-old, Mr Woods is performing exceedingly well: EAGLE predicts he would shoot around 0.4 strokes above par per 18 holes on a course of average difficulty for a major, ranking him among the world’s ten best players. Unfortunately, to win the Masters he will need to defeat several dozen competitors who are still in the prime of youth. EAGLE gives him a modest 2% probability of victory. So if not Mr Woods, who is most likely to don the green jacket? Mr Rose, who reached a sudden-death playoff at Augusta in 2017 but lost to Sergio García, currently sits atop the official world rankings. Betting markets see Mr McIlroy, who has finished among the top ten in all seven events he has played this year, as a clear favourite, with an 11% chance to win, nearly twice Mr Rose’s 6%. EAGLE also considers both of these stars to be leading candidates—but gives them around a 5% probability of victory, suggesting that Mr McIlroy is rather over-valued. Instead, it is the 34-year-old Mr Johnson whom the model sees as the leading contender in the field. Both he and Mr McIlroy have been on top of their games at the start of 2019. But golf is a fickle sport: even with no change in underlying skill, players’ scores vary vastly from day to day, thanks to the vagaries of course conditions and the random chance inherent in propelling a ball so small over distances so long. As a result, it takes very large samples of data to yield reliable estimates of golfers’ ability. Whereas human handicappers tend to place a heavy emphasis on recent form and mostly ignore results more than a few months old, EAGLE takes the long view. It factors in scores from a full year ago at around two-fifths of the impact of current data, and even incorporates rounds two years in the past (albeit at just one-sixth of the weight of a scorecard submitted yesterday). Mr McIlroy has proven he can win consistently on the biggest of stages, with four major titles before he turned 26. In contrast, questions still abound regarding the intestinal fortitude of the 34-year-old Mr Johnson, who has only one major championship to his name despite being five years older than Mr McIlroy. By design, however, EAGLE pays no heed to such arguments: with just four majors played per year, and so much good fortune required to beat such strong competition, there is no statistically reliable method to distinguish “clutch” or choke-prone golfers from those who are merely unlucky. (The model’s indifference to such criticisms was perhaps the main reason why it saw Mr García, who won his first major at the Masters at the age of 37, as one of the entrants most under-rated by betting markets entering the tournament.) As a result, EAGLE disregards Mr McIlroy’s glittering trophy case, and focuses instead on his relative stumbles late last year—such as a second-round 77 at the WGC-HSBC Champions in October. Although Mr Johnson is hardly immune to a bad round, his duds have simply been fewer and less disastrous than Mr McIlroy’s during the past year. Meanwhile, his finest moments have been even more impressive than his Northern Irish rival’s have. In February he shot 61 en route to winning the Saudi International, a showing that in EAGLE’s estimation was the third-best round of the past year (trailing only a 60 by Matt Ford and a 59 by Oliver Fisher that set a European Tour record). Under typical conditions for a major, EAGLE predicts Mr Johnson to come in 0.3 strokes below par per round. With Mr McIlroy (and Mr Rose) both forecasted at just about even par, that edge translates into an 8% chance of victory for the occasionally star-crossed Mr Johnson. As in any golf tournament with a large field, however, if you are asked which of the favourites is likely to win, the correct answer is “none of the above”. Over a mere 72 holes, a few strokes of good luck—literally and figuratively—count for far more than a substantive difference in skill. In the past 12 majors, just two of the victors were among the top five in the official rankings at the times when they won. If history and statistics are any guide, whoever gets to pick the menu at the Masters champions’ dinner next year will probably be a player only keen golf fans have heard of—but who has already demonstrated enough skill to compete with the world’s best if everything breaks his way. EAGLE’s favourite player in this tier is Patrick Cantlay. Once a highly touted amateur, Mr Cantlay’s career was derailed for three years by back injuries. Save for one event that seems to bring out the best in him—the Shriners Hospitals for Children Open, which he won in 2017 and finished second in the following year—he has rarely challenged for victories. However, his overall scoring record is close to elite: by EAGLE’s reckoning, his average card during the past year has been better than those of Bryson DeChambeau and Francesco Molinari, currently ranked sixth and seventh in the world. The model gives Mr Cantlay just over a 2% chance of securing the green jacket, more than double the 1% chance bettors assign to him. It is of course possible that Mr Cantlay just does not have what it takes to win the big one. But the odds that he does are surely greater than one in 100. Before a tournament gets underway, everyone is a long shot. By EAGLE’s assessment, even Mr Woods at the height of his powers had a 75% chance of losing each major he entered. Once golfers start registering scores, however, the odds start to fluctuate—modestly in the early rounds, violently on Sunday afternoon. When numerous players of varying abilities are bunched together on the leaderboard, even the savviest fan would struggle to determine just how close each of them is to securing the green jacket. EAGLE, in contrast, takes just a minute or two to digest all of this information and produce a precise estimate of where everyone stands. By the end of April 14th, one player’s probability of victory will soar to 100%, while everyone else’s will collapse to zero. We hope you consult EAGLE’s forecasts regularly along that journey.