IN AN empty bull ring in Quito, Ecuador, man after man steps forward, his face sombre, to read a letter by an anonymous woman describing her experience of sexual violence. Captured on film, then projected onto large screens, each account fades in, then out. A bigger screen reveals the entire bull ring filled with hundreds more men reading the letters aloud. Candles flicker; music begins; in the stands above, still others quietly read terrible stories of abuse to one another. The effect is electrifying. This is “De tu puño y letra (By Your Own Hand)” (pictured), an artwork by Suzanne Lacy, a renowned artist of “public practice”. It spanned months of workshops and collaboration, culminating with the Quito performance in 2015. It is now being reprised as part of a brilliant retrospective of Ms Lacy’s work at the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art (SFMOMA).  The challenge of presenting collaborative, process-orientated artworks in museums has become more pressing as more artists turn to such forms of expression. With “Suzanne Lacy: We Are Here”, which spans nearly 50 years of work by this pioneer of dialogue-based artwork, SFMOMA and the Yerba Buena Centre for the Arts show how such pieces can be exhibited in a compelling way. It helps that Ms Lacy’s body of work, while rooted in social and political issues—feminism, race, media portrayals of youth, age, the working class—speaks powerfully in the language of art. From her first interventions highlighting rape in Los Angeles, to large international works that stage complex public conversations, she crafts powerful visual and polyphonic experiences for participants and viewers alike. Ms Lacy began working with Judy Chicago in the Feminist Art Program at Fresno State College, then at the California Institute for the Arts, in the early 1970s. In a performance called “Ablutions” (1972)—which Ms Chicago thinks was “probably the first public work of art about rape”—several women bathed in blood, eggs and clay, while another was wrapped in bandages. A soundtrack played women’s accounts of attacks and Ms Lacy nailed sheep kidneys to the wall. A bachelor’s degree in zoology inspired her to use animal entrails to biting effect, in parodies of Julia Child, an American television chef, and common romantic expressions. “Anatomy Lesson #2”, for example, is a series of photos of Ms Lacy draped in various body parts. One, where sheep lungs rest on her torso, is captioned: “‘You steal my breath away,’ she gasped.” Her shift towards what one curator calls a “more operatic style” came with larger works modelled on feminist consciousness-raising circles. By then, Ms Lacy says, she had grasped that “everything we do is an exchange—we don’t exist in the world individually”. Her most famous work from this period, “The Crystal Quilt” (1987), involved hundreds of older women coming together to talk about erasure and survival. They sat at coloured tables designed to look, from above, like a giant quilt; the performance, at a shopping centre in Minneapolis, was filmed and later broadcast. While violence against women is an enduring theme of Ms Lacy’s work, in the 1990s she began a project addressing the demonisation of minority ethnic teenagers in Oakland, California, that would continue for a decade (pictured, above). This “lesson in social imagination”, as one critic called it, spawned eight major works aimed at giving teenagers their own voice. Adults are encouraged to “shut up and listen” as young people congregate on a rooftop, for example, or sit talking in their cars. The current exhibition carries this project forward with new work by young people addressing current problems through poetry, sound, media analysis and more. Ultimately, “relationship is my medium” the artist said at the opening of the retrospective (which will travel to Manchester in Britain next year). “So dialogue is my paint—and how it elicits emotional responses with the participants is my craft.” Orchestrating conversations as an artistic practice can be a powerful tool for social progress, she says, “but it’s not without a lot of conflict”. In the many communities with which Ms Lacy works, trust must be built over time, through “transparency and negotiation of difference.” The efficacy of this approach is illustrated by a major project in Britain, “The Circle and the Square” (2017, pictured above). In the Lancashire borough of Pendle, an integrated community of millworkers—part Pakistani and Indian immigrants, part white British—fell apart when one of the country’s largest textile mills closed in 2007. Ms Lacy convened both groups in the abandoned factory, Asians in a circle performing Sufi chants and white residents singing in a traditional choral square. A stunning two-panel film beautifully blends music and image, overlapping and cross-fading to recreate the community that once existed. Beyond the aesthetic pleasure, the project produced concrete results. “She had a ridiculously large influence on the community as a whole,” reports Mark Thomas, the film-maker, including new arts grants and “a tremendous positivity that drew people out and together”. In this fractured political moment, he observes, “it’s vital to have this kind of practice now”. “Suzanne Lacy: We Are Here” is on view at SFMOMA and the Yerba Buena Centre for the Arts until August 4th 2019