ON MARCH 31ST 1964 Brazilian soldiers stationed in the south-eastern city of Juiz de Fora began to march toward Rio de Janeiro, marking the start of a military coup. In the days that followed, João Goulart, the democratically elected president, fled to Uruguay. He was replaced by a general. Many ordinary Brazilians backed the soldiers, believing that Goulart, a populist left-winger, was planning a coup of his own to install a government inspired by the Peronism of neighbouring Argentina. Most assumed that the army would rule only until an election could be held in 1965. In fact, the dictatorship lasted 21 years. It shut down congress three times, severely restricted press freedom, tortured thousands of dissidents and murdered hundreds. As Marxist guerrilla groups emerged to oppose the regime in the late 1960s the repression intensified. Jair Bolsonaro, Brazil’s far-right president, recently ordered the army to commemorate the coup. In instructions to commanders, his defence minister described the dictatorship as a legitimate response to “the clamour of the ample majority of the population” in the face of leftist extremism. This enraged victims of the military regime, politicians who served in democratic governments and human-rights groups. They appealed to the courts to block the commemorations. But after a flurry of rulings the army was allowed to proceed. Fancy lunches and marches took place at barracks throughout Brazil on March 31st. In Rio de Janeiro and São Paulo, violence broke out between people demonstrating for and against the dictatorship. Mr Bolsonaro has made no secret of his approval of the dictatorship of 1964-1985. A former army captain, he was elected seven times to the lower chamber of congress thanks largely to votes from police officers and veterans. He once said in a radio interview that the dictatorship’s only mistake was that it tortured people instead of killing them. His son, Eduardo, a congressman from São Paulo, remarked that “a soldier and a captain” would suffice to shut down the supreme court. During the presidential campaign last year, Mr Bolsonaro made light of such comments, calling them harmless, and dismissed accusations that he posed a risk to Brazil’s democracy. Once in office he filled his government with generals. They have so far helped to stabilise an administration that has been plagued by feuds and scandals in its first few months. Mr Bolsonaro’s admiration for the dictatorship stems in part from his antipathy for the political left, which he deems to be a source of immorality and corruption. So strong is his aversion that he declared on a recent trip to Israel that Nazism was a left-wing phenomenon rather than a movement of the extreme right. The education minister describes the dictatorship as “a democratic regime by force”. Mr Bolsonaro’s commemoration could weaken support for democracy. The reason why becomes evident in a video distributed by his office to journalists on the coup’s anniversary. Just two minutes long, it begins in black and white. A man with silver hair and scholarly glasses explains to “young” viewers that the 1960s were a “time of fear and threats”. Communists were “killing their compatriots” and threatening to impose their leftist ideology on all Brazilians. The public took to the streets, begging for an intervention. Then, he says, “Brazil remembered that it had an army.” The black and white gives way to colour and the sombre melody is replaced by up-tempo music, punctuated with cymbal crashes. “The army saved us,” the man says, as Brazil’s flag appears behind him. “It’s impossible to change history.” But Mr Bolsonaro seems to have a very strange interpretation of it.