 BACK LAST May when he filed the censure motion that brought him into office, Pedro Sánchez brushed off demands for an immediate election. With less than a quarter of the seats in Congress, he governed for ten months through a mix of significant gestures—in particular a big rise in the minimum wage—and symbolic acts, such as starting the process of moving the remains of Franco, the former dictator, to a less prominent location. His reward came on April 28th when his Socialist party won a general election with 123 seats, gaining 2m more votes and 38 more seats compared with the last ballot in 2016. That is well short of a majority, however, so the Socialists will need allies to govern in the 350-seat Congress. But on paper at least, Mr Sánchez may be able to find them on either left or centre-right. The election increased the fragmentation of what was once a two-party system in Spain. The right paid a price in lost seats for its splintering into three. The formerly dominant conservative People’s Party (PP) lost more than half of its seats. Ciudadanos, a formerly liberal but now more right-of-centre party, came within 220,000 votes of the PP. The hard right, in the shape of Vox, a newish ultra-nationalist party, entered Congress for the first time since 1982. But with only 24 seats and 10.3% of the vote, it fell short of many forecasts. The spectre of Vox, indeed, probably helped Mr Sánchez to mobilise his voters. A high turnout of 76% on a warm spring day helped the Catalan separatists too, who won 22 seats, up from 17. “We’ve sent a message to Europe and the world that you can defeat reaction [and] authoritarianism,” Mr Sánchez told a cheering crowd outside the Socialist headquarters in Madrid. He will now face two big tasks: to fulfil his promise of a fairer society when economic recovery is slowing, and to try to defuse Catalan separatism. First he will have to marshall a majority in Congress. “From our ideas on the left, we will extend our hand to all political forces [who operate] within the constitution,” he said. One option, and perhaps the likeliest, is to join forces with Podemos, a further-left outfit with 42 seats (down from 71), the moderate Basque nationalists and assorted regional parties. Pablo Iglesias, Podemos’s leader, has been pressing for a formal coalition—a first in Spain’s post-Franco era. This would echo Portugal’s largely successful government. But such an assemblage will be able to govern only if it can rely on the abstention of Catalan separatists on big votes. Catalan opposition was the reason why Mr Sanchez’s failed to pass his budget in February, leading to the early election. And forming such a coalition may be tricky anyway. Many Socialist voters will recoil at Podemos’s commitment to an independence referendum in Catalonia. The Socialists do favour dialogue with the separatists, but a referendum is not currently on offer. A stronger, but politically even more difficult, option would be a coalition with Ciudadanos. Albert Rivera, the party’s leader, explicitly ruled that out during the campaign and did so again on election night, saying that he would lead the opposition. Mr Rivera wants a hard-line approach to Catalan separatism, not dialogue as Mr Sánchez advocates; he also sees an opportunity to displace the PP as the dominant force on the centre-right. For their part, Socialist activists listening to Mr Sánchez outside party headquarters chanted “Not with Rivera”. The private sector and many centrists will urge both men to reconsider. But Mr Sánchez is unlikely to announce any decision until after municipal, regional and European elections on May 26th. With the entry of Vox and a stronger Catalan separatist contingent, the new Congress is likely to be a rowdy and ill-tempered body, when Spain needs the moderation and concord Mr Sánchez is pledged to seek. The election leaves the Spanish right with a difficult task of rebuilding. Unless the PP does much better next month, its new leader, Pablo Casado, is likely to be forced out. He chose to tack right, trying to echo rather than challenge Vox. For the Socialists, whatever happens next, this was their first victory since 2008 and a personal triumph for Mr Sánchez, who was briefly ejected as party leader in 2016-17. The days of absolute majorities in Spain are over for the time being. But Spain’s prime minister has delivered a rare good result for European social democracy.