SINCE ITS first release in 2008, the Marvel Cinematic Universe (MCU) has reset the parameters of film franchises. It has told a multifaceted story across more than 20 films without “rebooting” itself, or replacing the cast. It has released those films in quick succession, and they have grossed more than $18bn to date. Its fans are dedicated, emotionally invested and numerous. Competing studios have spent a decade trying to replicate this model; none has. “Avengers: Endgame”, the 22nd title in the series, is released worldwide this week. It is predicted to take as much as $300m in its opening weekend in both America and China, setting new box-office records. Audience anticipation for “Endgame”, which unlike earlier MCU “team-up” films is designed to bring several character arcs to a final, if not fatal, close, is unprecedented. In America, the film has taken an estimated $120-140m in ticket pre-sales. The prior record holder, “Star Wars: The Force Awakens” (2015), took $100m, and became the third highest-grossing film in history.  Demand is so high that many cinema chains, such as AMC Theatres, are planning up to a week of round-the-clock screenings in select venues, with a showing every 30 or even 15 minutes. When tickets went on sale, every major ticketing site in America crashed. Some opening-day tickets are being flogged on eBay, where the bidding reaches nearly $10,000. The story is similar in China, too. “Endgame” has sold 50% more pre-sale tickets than “Monster Hunt 2” (2018), a celebrated adventure flick. No other title has sold more than 1m tickets before its release, not even those timed for Chinese New Year, a high point for attendance. “Endgame” did so in three hours. All this reflects the goodwill built up by the film-makers over the MCU’s preceding 21 titles. Marvel has made blockbuster franchises out of virtually unknown comic-book characters such as Doctor Strange, Black Panther and Captain Marvel, to say nothing of the Guardians of the Galaxy, a team that includes a cybernetic racoon, a walking tree who can only say three words and an alien that cannot understand sarcasm. “Endgame” delivers on this brand equity, spanning the entirety of the MCU and its core characters. It explores the personal growth of characters such as Iron Man, Captain America and Thor, as well as their shared need to defeat Thanos, the Malthusian bad guy who eliminated half of all life in the universe at the end of “Infinity War”. The film is fun, surprising and often subversive, even if it sometimes struggles to mix the seriousness of its stakes with the cosmic nonsense of its conceits, and the Avengers’ plan to solve it. Perhaps, after 21 films, it should not come as a surprise that “Endgame” will be a hit: fans have been rushing to theatres to watch Marvel movies for more than a decade. For now, Marvel’s big test is extending itself to the small screen. Next year, the studio will launch the first of four MCU series—starring Jeremy Renner (Hawkeye), Tom Hiddleston (Loki) and Anthony Mackie (Falcon)—for Disney’s forthcoming video subscription service, Disney+. While Marvel has tried this before, these series were always run by a separate division in the company, had only superficial connections to the MCU proper and rarely shared characters. The Disney+ series will instead be overseen by Kevin Feige, the president of Marvel Studios, who promises they will “intersect with the movies in a very big way”. Eleven years later, “Endgame” is just the beginning.