A YEAR AGO, most observers expected Rahm Emanuel, who was then amassing a big pile of campaign money, to win a third consecutive term as mayor of Chicago. Few dared oppose him. But in May 2018 Lori Lightfoot, a political outsider with few political connections, said she would take him on. At first Ms Lightfoot earned eye-rolls, not acclaim. She seemed unlikely to make it into a run-off election, let alone win it. Yet on April 2nd, after a run-off campaign against Toni Preckwinkle, a more experienced politician with a web of political ties across the city, Ms Lightfoot, a former federal prosecutor, triumphed. She took an estimated 74% of the total vote, sweeping all 50 wards of the city. Ms Lightfoot is both the first African-American woman and the first lesbian to become mayor of America’s third-biggest city. As Ms Lightfoot told a campaign event recently, she rose from humble origins by first training as a lawyer and then reinventing herself as a politician. “I am a black success story, I’m not going to shy away from that,” she said to cheers during one campaign event. On Election Day she observed that it would be quite something to beat the Chicago political machine. But Ms Lightfoot didn’t just win; she crushed her opponent. The biggest factor in that success was the candidate herself. Ms Lightfoot ran a disciplined campaign in which she appealed to a wide range of voters. Her signature issue was a promise to tackle corruption. She also vowed to reform the police force and reduce the violence that plagues poorer areas of Chicago. Her decision to run early, which meant she began campaigning in the summer, also paid off. Once Mr Emanuel had pulled out of the race unexpectedly in September, other candidates rushed into the race, including Ms Preckwinkle. Compared with Ms Lightfoot, they seemed nakedly opportunistic. In the first round of voting in February, there were 14 candidates. Turnout was low. That meant rival contenders who might have pushed aside Ms Lightfoot instead scuppered each other’s chances. She narrowly took first place. Then in the run-off round against Ms Preckwinkle, more liberal-minded, wealthy and white voters in the north of Chicago backed Ms Lightfoot. That provided her with funds to pay for a steady flow of television and digital ads throughout the campaign. Ms Preckwinkle, despite being backed by several unions, did remarkably badly. She won more support from black voters on the South Side of the city. But two controversies ruined her chances. First, she has long been allied with a councillor on Chicago’s city council, Ed Burke, who was this year arrested and charged by the FBI with extortion. Only then did Ms Preckwinkle try to distance herself from Mr Burke, who had fundraised for her. She struggled to convince anyone she would make a serious effort to end corruption in the city. Second, Ms Preckwinkle slipped up in a debate when she mentioned her opponent’s openness about her sexuality. Her apparent praise of Ms Lightfoot was interpreted by many as a dog-whistle intended to prompt conservative, religious and black voters to turn against the lesbian candidate. Around the same time homophobic leaflets appeared in black churches on the South Side of Chicago warning, ridiculously, that Ms Lightfoot planned to install a cabal of gay extremists to run the city. That backfired, probably encouraging more voters to rally around her. At her victory rally on April 2nd, Ms Lightfoot talked of a city “reborn” as a place where race and “who you love” no longer matters. The symbolism of electing the first African American woman as mayor will help Chicago promote itself as open and welcoming to people of diverse backgrounds. But once the euphoria of the election is over, Ms Lightfoot faces some daunting challenges. An FBI probe of corruption in the city will continue, and the new mayor must deliver on promises to make institutional changes to cut powers for aldermen—as city councillors are known—and to bring more transparency to city government. On policing there are some difficult decisions to make. Chicago is already under a “consent decree”, under which federal monitors supervise how the city reforms its 13,000-strong police force. Authorities must also push harder to reduce the high levels of street violence that plague the South and West Sides of the city especially. The summer months always see the highest outbreaks of violence in Chicago, so Ms Lightfoot could face such challenges soon. Perhaps toughest of all is the question of how to improve Chicago’s public finances. Ms Lightfoot will need to spend on public transport infrastructure, fill gaping holes in city pensions, divert resources to reinvigorate the South Side of the city, but also continue the sort of urban redevelopment that helped Mr Emanuel convince large companies to shift their headquarters to the city. Deficits need plugging, even as many residents complain that city tax rates are already high. Ms Lightfoot has no experience in handling a big bureaucracy, managing the aldermen she promises to confront or coming up with smart ideas for raising revenues without scaring off taxpayers. Her victory gives her a strong mandate. But her four-year term will be a demanding one.