WHEN KENGO KUMA was ten years old, his father took him to the Yoyogi National Stadium, the centrepiece of the Tokyo Olympics in 1964. In a city still recovering from wartime carpet-bombing, the modernist masterpiece, with its sleek lines and soaring roof, looked like the future. “From that moment I knew I wanted to be an architect,” he says. Mr Kuma, now 64, still admires Kenzo Tange, the stadium’s designer, but at some point in the 1990s he turned against the synthetic, bombastic architecture that had dominated Tokyo since the war. The city’s ancient heritage, particularly its green spaces and spidery waterways, had been razed in the rush to rebuild. “I began to think that we should live with nature rather than dominate it,” he says. Mr Kuma’s goal now is to integrate buildings into their environment and use local materials, a method he calls “recovering the place”. His latest attempt to put it into practice is the Victoria and Albert Museum in Dundee, a pair of craggy inverted pyramids by the River Tay meant to invoke the Scottish cliffs, which opened in September. It is just one of roughly 100 projects Mr Kuma’s practice is handling around the world at any one time. Of these, Tokyo’s new Olympic stadium is perhaps the most freighted in controversy. The original plan, by Zaha Hadid, was universally criticised: it was compared to a giant bicycle helmet and a potty, and, at nearly 290,000 square metres, the stadium would have been the biggest in the history of the games. When the plan was scrapped four years ago, Mr Kuma was asked to step in and save Japan from embarrassment on the global stage. His building is due to be completed in November. It is a neat career arc for a man inspired by an aesthetic he now wants to revolutionise. Mr Kuma sees his task as preventing the stadium from overwhelming the historic Jingu-Gaien neighbourhood, one of Tokyo’s greenest. His plan has shaved 26 metres off the height of the original and uses a pagoda structure to make the most of natural wind and light. The project is steeped in national prestige but Mr Kuma says he approaches it like all others. “I don’t think of my buildings as belonging to a country, but to a place.” He still remembers his childhood shock as a bullet-train station (“a monster of steel and concrete”) rose out of the rice paddies in Yokoyama, near his home. Tange’s Yoyogi stadium, he says, was a monument to that period of breakneck economic expansion and “building the same way now would be a disaster”. Yet Tokyo, he laments, is still a 20th-century city struggling to become a 21st-century one. Planners follow a path of development laid down in the 1960s—towers, shopping centres, plazas—and what Mr Kuma calls “last century clichés”. He wants Tokyo to do more to protect its heritage and to move toward a sustainable model of development, instead of demolishing and rebuilding in the name of progress. Pockets of his conservationist vision remain. Tokyo Station, one of the last examples of the city’s classic architectural past, has been refurbished—at great cost. Kagurazaka, a dense warren of cobblestoned streets and traditional houses that was once a geisha district, survives too. Mr Kuma says he spends a great deal of time there, working to save it from the bulldozer. “It’s my favourite place in the world.”