IN THE LATE 20th century, it seemed possible to imagine alternative futures for the world’s great religions. Either they would be persecuted by secular or atheist regimes, or they would flourish freely and unpredictably. Either these faiths would find a way of co-existing, or different groups of believers or “civilisations” would clash, very possibly in ways their political masters found hard to control. One possibility that people underestimated is that faith, in certain carefully selected forms, would become co-opted as an instrument of state policy. Yet to judge by several recent articles in America’s influential foreign-policy journals, that could be a powerful trend in the 21st century. In the latest issue of Foreign Affairs, Ian Johnson notes that the Chinese state, as well as cracking down on religions with foreign connections (Christianity, Islam, Tibetan Buddhism) is also fostering forms of spiritual practice which it finds more benign, including Taoism and the forms of Buddhism practised by the Han Chinese majority. The first phenomenon, including the closure of some churches and mosques and the arrest of well-known pastors, has been widely noticed in the outside world, the latter one less so. As he writes: The selective co-optation of religion in Vladimir Putin’s Russia is more obvious (given the president’s overt Russian Orthodox piety) and not quite so dramatic: so far, anyway, Russia has nothing comparable to the re-education camps set up for Uighur Muslims in China. But as Christopher Stroop notes in a recent issue of Foreign Policy, another journal, one striking feature of today’s Russia is that faith is more clearly present in the echelons of political power than it is at the base of society. He detects signs of “a return to the Orthodox church’s historical role, despite some tensions and resistance from within, of functioning as an effective arm of the Russian state in matters both foreign and domestic.” He adds that “today, [Vladimir] Putin benefits from the backing of the Orthodox church, an institution that, despite lower levels of Russian piety and direct religious participation, enjoys considerable respect among the Russian population.” Russian government explicitly favours “traditional” religions (favoured forms of Orthodox Christianity, Islam, Buddhism and Judaism) over others which suffer various bureaucratic restrictions. In a couple of cases (the Jehovah’s Witnesses and certain forms of Islam) there have been many arrests for “extremism”. There is one difference between China and Russia, as described by these two writers. In Mr Johnson’s presentation, the resurgence of traditional religion in China is a fairly spontaneous trend, reflecting people’s need to combine rising prosperity with some deeper sources of meaning, to which the state is artfully reacting. In Russia, too, there is a trade-off of interests between faith and state, but the state seems more clearly in the driving seat. The current issue of Foreign Affairs also includes an article which notes the remarkable evolution of the Turkish state’s religious policy, especially beyond the country’s boundaries. In the years before the rise to power of President Recep Tayyip Erdogan, the diyanet or religious-affairs administration based in Ankara served precisely to curb zealous or politically tinged forms of Islam, including in the Turkish diaspora. Its purpose was to keep the practice of Islam within safe boundaries that presented no threat to the secular Turkish republic. These days, a well-financed diyanet and its external branches are used both to rally support for Mr Erdogan among the diaspora and also to promote relatively zealous forms of Islam. This trend has survived the fall from grace of Fethullah Gulen, the exiled preacher who is blamed by Mr Erdogan for the coup attempt of 2016. Of course, the harnessing of religion for politically useful purposes comes in many shapes and sizes. It takes one form in countries where a single party, faction or dynasty enjoys confident control, and another in lands where political power is vigorously contested, so that parties often compete with one another to whip up and exploit religious zeal. The political founders of India and Pakistan, established as relatively secular democracies, would be shocked to find how salient a factor religion has become in the high politics of those countries. (In the first country, strident Hinduism has become an electoral winner; in the second, no leader or party could hope to gain power without paying lip service, at least, to some form of political Islam.) Should China’s rulers, untroubled by the prospect of contested elections, feel cooler and more relaxed as they set about boosting some religions and harshly curbing others? Mr Johnson thinks not; he suggests the current policy of picking favoured religions and persecuting inconvenient ones could backfire, in part because the faiths being repressed will refuse to go away. As he writes: “Until now, if one thought of large Asian countries where the mixing of religion and politics has caused strife and violence, India, Indonesia and Pakistan might come to mind. In the future, this list could include China. [But] this need not happen. If the state steps back and takes a deep breath, it could avoid the conflicts that its current policies seem bound to create.” If all these writers are correct in their descriptions, it seems that religion, like economics, is an area where the binary choices of the cold war turned out to be an illusion. Take economics first. After decades of contest between free-wheeling capitalism and top-down communist planning, a hybrid emerged in many transitional countries which is sometimes called state capitalism: in other words, a system that captures some of the efficiencies of capitalism but restricts the benefits to an oligarchic elite that husbands all forms of power. And in the spiritual realm, after long years of standoff between Soviet-led atheist power and a West that believed in religious freedom, the outcome has not been victory for one side or the other, but the emergence of state-guided religion. In neither case can the results be described as stable.