ON DECEMBER 31st, some 400 days before contenders will fight their first electoral battle of the 2020 presidential cycle in the Iowa caucuses, Senator Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts became the first prominent Democrat to enter the race. The following weekend, she embarked on a five-city tour of the Midwestern toss-up state to take her message of economic populism to voters. “Washington keeps working great for those with money, but not for anyone else,” she said. “This is corruption, pure and simple and it stops right now.” But the ultimate fight will be against President Donald Trump, and Mrs Warren’s critics are sceptical that she can win in a duel with him. Her tussle with the president over her claims of Native America ancestry remains a particular problem; Mrs Warren will find it hard to shake off the “Pocahontas” nickname Mr Trump coined for her. Indeed the first question posed by a member of the crowd at a rally in Sioux City asked why she had publicly undergone a DNA test to prove her claim. Mrs Warren responded that she was not claiming to be a “person of colour” or “citizen of a tribe”; she had detailed the results of the test (in a video published in October) to put the issue to rest. Mr Trump, she went on, cannot be stopped “from hurling racist insults.” That prompted cheers from the crowd; the remainder of the questions were about Mrs Warren’s policies. She must hope the rest of her campaign follows that pattern. Mrs Warren began her stump speech in Sioux City with her life story. She grew up in a blue collar family in Oklahoma with the desire to one day become a public school teacher; she went on to become a law professor at Harvard. She used her impoverished upbringing to justify a raise in the federal minimum wage—notably, the first policy mentioned in her campaign—which she said lifted her family out of poverty. “Today a minimum wage job in America full time will not keep a momma and a baby out of poverty,” she said, “and it is wrong, and that’s why I’m in this fight.’’ Mrs Warren also listed health care, housing, child care and education as policies that need immediate investment to offset high costs that are “hollowing” out middle class America. The good news for Mrs Warren is that a majority of voters agree with her on all of this. According to Pew Research Centre, 58% of voters support raising the federal minimum wage to $15 an hour, and 60% say the federal government is responsible for providing Americans with medical insurance. The bad news is voters’ negative view of the taxes that help fund this spending. According to Gallup, half of Americans believe they paid too much in taxes last year. Still, 62% think that the rich pay too little. If Mrs Warren can navigate this tricky issue, she may do well. But she will need to shed her reputation as a far-out leftie by proving that she has a sensible plan for funding her ambitious policy agenda. Like Mr Trump, Mrs Warren says she wants to clean up corruption in Washington, DC. Unlike Mr Trump, she identifies the root of the problem as being lobbyists, corporations, and big-money special interests, rather than the government. “A lot of decisions that are made in far-off Washington are decisions that help the wealthy and the well-connected, and leave everyone else behind,” she said. She blamed corporations for high prescription drug prices, environmental degradation and costly student loans, and blamed lobbyists for an economic system tilted toward the wealthy. “Every issue that affects us in this country right now...they intersect at the question of who the government works for,” she said. Mrs Warren claims that the Capitol is filled with chatter about what big business, not Joe Schmoe, wants. Some political scientists agree with that. Alexander Hertel-Fernandez, Matto Mildenberger and Leah C. Stokes say Mrs Warren is right to say that business has taken control of politics. In a paper published last year, they wrote that 62% of congressional staffers believe that letters from large companies are “very” or “somewhat” representative of public opinion in their district. Just a third believed the same about letters from an average constituent. Though polls are unreliable this far out—much can change before the initial nomination contests—a recent poll found that 64% of Democrats viewed her favourably while only 20% viewed her unfavourably. However, that could change when more candidates enter the race. In 2018, a study by Brian F. Schaffner, Matthew MacWilliams, and Tatishe Nteta, political scientists, found that sexism played a big role in Hillary Clinton’s demise in 2016. Mrs Clinton was often criticised for “playing the woman card” after supporters shored up her candidacy with phrases like “it’s her turn.” Perhaps Mrs Warren—who made no mention of being a woman during her first speech in Iowa—may escape that curse. But her critics will doubtless go on describing her in terms that tend to be reserved for female politicians, like “shrill” and “unlikeable.”