A YOUNG man approaches two imams picking fruit on a dusty road in rural Turkey. After friendly greetings, they get to talking: the imams reveal that they have just attended a lavish wedding, and their acquaintance quickly expresses disapproval of such extravagance. “No wonder we can’t find an honest man around here,” he says. “That’d mean taking a good long look at ourselves.” One cleric suggests that prayer fulfils that role, but the youth scoffs. “Come off it, sir—get away with murder all day, then pray it off every night?” The short scene, like many others in “The Wild Pear Tree”, a film by Nuri Bilge Ceylan, is naturalistic and well-observed. In Turkey traditional customs and modern attitudes find unusual mouthpieces; such ideas are constantly in dialogue with each other, jostling for supremacy. The country’s contradictions and divides—between community and individualism, spirituality and materialism—are exposed during the wanderings of Sinan (Aydın Doğu Demirkol), the sarcastic young man. He has just finished studying at a university in the city of Çanakkale, a metropolitan tourist spot because of its proximity to Gallipoli and ancient Troy, and returned to his home village. He is an aspiring writer, and has drawn material from his youth for his first manuscript. It is, he suggests, a meditation upon small-town life and thought, for unlike his neighbours he is now “free of any influence of faith, ideology and authority”. The people he describes are like wild pears, “misfits, solitary, misshapen.” He hopes to find the money to publish, and fast—now that he has finished his education, compulsory military service awaits. He does not want to risk being called away for months before his artistic endeavours can come to fruition. Sinan is, in many ways, typical of the country’s youth: over-educated, under-employed and dissatisfied. He briefly considers joining his friend in the riot-police force, but cannot summon the enthusiasm for “beating up lefties”, so he spends his days catching up with friends in teahouses and picking fights with his charming but roguish and irresponsible father, Idris (Murat Cemcir), who is addicted to betting on horses. Sinan’s weary mother hopes that he will persuade Idris to stop squandering his salary, but the evasive father and short-tempered son can barely manage small talk. Sinan is too focused, anyway, on flogging his manuscript about town, asking district mayors, local writers and even property developers for funding. Each has his own reasons for denying the request. The mayor, who boasts that his door is open to everyone and that he is committed to supporting culture, lists in the same breath several bureaucratic hurdles. A proudly self-made property developer launches into a tirade about the useless romanticism of youth, and advises Sinan to instead write a tourist-trap guidebook that will be more profitable. An older, established writer is defensive and withholding of advice, flustered by the literary competition. Sinan eventually succeeds in publishing his book, though it causes a tingle rather than a sensation; it feels like a metaphor of sorts for the economic hurdles the country’s overwhelmingly young population face. The troubled father-son relationship, too, hints at a generational divide. Sinan rails against the fact that his complacent and spendthrift father does not meet the needs of the family yet is still considered its rightful patriarch. In this, Sinan is not alone. Like many men born after Turkey opened up to the global market in the 1980s, he thinks in terms that are individualistic and entrepreneurial. But the codes of masculinity in Turkey still remain social. Sinan wants to change or escape the duties that shaped his father’s generation, yet envies the certainties that came with them. Even as Mr Ceylan’s film points to real difficulties, it refuses to heed simplifications and stereotypes. The two men’s values are not easily mapped onto their ages: when his once-rebellious childhood sweetheart, Hatice (Hazar Ergüçlü), agrees to an arranged marriage, Sinan displays a misogyny never evinced by his father. The nation, too, is not neatly divided along Islamist and secular lines, but splintered into many groups. Of the two imams, the younger one displays a democratising zeal in his arguments about Quranic interpretation; both offload thankless community duties, such as reciting the call to prayer, onto older clerics. Sinan’s mother and sister do not wear headscarves, nor do they have any trouble holding their own against men, but that independence can also be a burden. Though the plot lacks urgency, Mr Ceylan rewards viewers’ patience with striking dialogue, scenes and landscapes. “The Wild Pear Tree” is a rich and poetic film that manages to do two difficult things at once: it explores the psyche of a country, and it reminds viewers everywhere of the trials of growing up. “The Wild Pear Tree” opens in America on January 30th