LAST YEAR, a 20-metre-long pink neon sign was suspended from the vaulting Victorian ceiling in London’s St Pancras station. The installation, by Tracey Emin, declared: “I want my time with you”. The artist has produced other works combining romantic sentiments with electronic epigrams—“I Can’t Believe How Much You Loved Me” (2012), and the more matter-of-fact “People Like You Need to Fuck People Like Me” (2007)—but the location of this work afforded it a resonance beyond the sweet nothings of a lover. Directly facing the platforms of the British terminal of the Eurostar, it seemed to address not only the passengers shuttling back and forth from Paris and Amsterdam, but also an entire continent. It felt like London’s love letter to a Europe that was slipping away by the second. The work invoked a deeply held political metaphor, in which international relations are imagined as akin to romantic ones. It has seeped into discussions of Brexit: politicians and pundits talk about “divorce” negotiations; “Breaking Up Is Hard To Do”, Neil Sedaka’s soppy doo-wop hit, has become a staple at pro-Remain demonstrations. “Leave to Remain”, a new musical co-written by playwright Matt Jones and Kele Okereke, the lead singer of Bloc Party, turns the analogy on its head. Rather than seeking to understand politics and nationhood in terms of personal relationships, it draws on the language of Britain’s troubled multiculturalism to tell an equally troubled romantic tale. “Give me your leave to remain”, the eponymous number croons, turning Home Office jargon for permanent status into a love song. Like most marriage plots, “Leave to Remain” circles around the challenges of intimacy, familial ructions and difficult personalities. The novelty is that the protagonists are young, modish gay men: Alex (Billy Cullum), an ex-addict American financier, and his boyfriend Obi (Tyrone Huntley), a digital marketer from a family of Nigerian immigrants. The London through which they move is youthful, affluent and liberal, involving art galleries and wine bars, trendy clubs and party drugs. The snag comes when Alex’s job is relocated to Abu Dhabi in the wake of Brexit, joining a finance-industry exodus. Without a sponsor for his visa, the only way for Alex to remain in Britain is to get married to Obi. Preparations begin, the respective families convene, and the scene is set for a culture-clash romantic comedy. In a startlingly poignant flashback, the audience finds out that Obi’s conservative Catholic Nigerian father (Cornell S. John) threw Obi out of the house as a teenager after finding out that he was gay. The archetype of the gruff patriarch is familiar, but is admirably fleshed out in Mr John’s portrayal of a loving but wrong-headed man, tragically incapable of reconciling his son’s sexuality with his own archaic notions of piety and propriety. At the opposite end of the spectrum are Alex’s smothering and hyper-liberal parents. Johanne Murdock is exceptional as Diane, a gilet-sporting “tiger mom”. Nigerians and Americans are both gently ribbed: there’s a gag about Jamie Oliver’s bastardisation of West African jollof rice, and as Diane strides into her son’s Victorian warehouse conversion she loudly marvels at such “an historic building”. Mr Okereke’s musical numbers are excellent, peppering the narrative with a blend of catchy electro-rock and West African “High Life” melodies. Beneath this relatively benign picture of modern, multicultural marriage, there are hints at the troubles that continue to disproportionately afflict gay men, such as addiction and depression. While Alex is accepted by his family—he glowers at his mother for booking a wedding venue without asking him first—Obi is alienated from his, and struggles to convince his father to show up at all. Audiences who saw “The Inheritance”, Matthew Lopez’s sprawling epic which has just completed a rapturously praised run, might find parallels between it and this modern love story. Where “Leave to Remain” fails to match “The Inheritance”, however, is in its handling of politics. “The Inheritance” masterfully teased out the pressures that the Trump presidency has exerted on America’s gay community, fissuring its solidarity along lines of race, class and age. “Leave to Remain” is far more simplistic, occasionally risking glibness. This is mostly a forgivable condition of its format. It is a two-hour musical where “The Inheritance” was an eight-hour play. Nevertheless, despite its provocatively topical title, “Leave to Remain” ends up being strangely apolitical. Brexit features only as an initial catalyst, prompting Alex’s job move. Obi is a British national and Alex is American, so neither is affected by the uncertainty over EU migrants’ rights, or by the “hostile environment” policies that were recently inflicted on Britain’s Caribbean immigrants. Still, taken on its own terms, like Tracey Emin’s neon sign, “Leave to Remain” is a sincere and uplifting production, exalting love across borders and cultures. “Leave to Remain” is showing at the Lyric Hammersmith until February 16th