FOR THE 800,000 or so federal workers who have already endured a month of the partial government shutdown—and so gone without pay in January—this is not yet a moment to rejoice. A glimmer of hope appeared in the Senate on January 22nd when Democratic and Republican legislative leaders separately dished up proposals that could, in theory, lead to the reopening of government. The respective plans should go to a vote on January 24th. Yet neither one, at first blush, indicates that the sides are seeking compromise. In fact the reverse may be true: the Republican proposal includes a scheme to make the asylum process much harder for applicants, and thus appears designed to deter any Democrats from agreeing to it. Unless a plan gets some senators to cross the aisle, and thus 60 votes to clear the Senate, the shutdown will go on. President Donald Trump and the Republicans appear to face the bigger problem. Many voters recall how a bullish Mr Trump, before Christmas, bragged that he would gladly own the shutdown, insisting Democrats had to agree to his demand for $5.7bn to build a border wall against migrants from central America. He relished the battle and has talked since of keeping the government closed for much longer. But polls appear to show voters tiring of his bluster. One poll conducted early this month for NPR, PBS Newshour and Marist indicates that even members of his base, such as suburban men, are becoming upset over his handling of the affair. Evangelicals and men without college degrees—also core groups of Trump backers—appear to be losing enthusiasm too. Mr Trump may calculate that any unpopularity will be transient; other polls show mixed opinions. But the signs do not look good. Pressure is building on Democrats, too. Although Nancy Pelosi and Chuck Schumer, Democratic House and Senate leaders, sound resolute, not all in the party are so sure. One Democratic congressman, Collin Peterson, has already buckled (his district in Minnesota is heavily Trump-supporting). He said on January 22nd his party should concede defeat and pay up for the wall. The sum in dispute is already less than the accumulated costs incurred because of the shutdown. And the suffering of 40% of federal government workers who are forced to stay home—or who must work while waiting to be paid later—is a lot to bear to make a point of principle. Disruption, meanwhile, is growing. For some 420,000 federal employees working without pay, such as airport security staff, absenteeism is rising. On January 20th one-in-ten of those airport workers failed to show up, far above the level seen in any other shutdown. So far that hasn’t led to big delays at airports, nor obvious security weaknesses, but eventually it could. For institutions such as the FBI, NASA, or federal museums in Washington, DC the temporary absence of staff or closures have been managed without great long-term harm. But prolonged closure could be costly in unexpected ways. Some reports suggest the FBI is running short of cash to pay its networks of secret informers. Food-safety inspections might be curtailed. Museum revenue is plunging. Nine of 15 cabinet-level departments, including agriculture, homeland security, interior, justice, the State Department and transport are unfunded. And an international conference on border security to be run by the State Department, in February, is likely to be postponed. For workers themselves, a second month without pay will of course hurt—the more so as a wintry turn in much of the country forces up household spending on heating. More than half of Americans are thought to have savings of $1,000 or less, so in difficult times rely on charity from relatives or friends, low-interest loans or credit card debt, plus occasional handouts of food or other gifts from companies, to get by. Tales of individual acts of kindness to federal staff denied their salaries abound. But small acts of relief will give ever less comfort as negotiations continue to stall. To the rest of the world, the episode offers the latest piece of evidence that America’s government is dysfunctional. Someone soon will have to blink.