DO YOU enjoy your job? Only 13% of employees feel engaged in their jobs, according to a Gallup survey of global workers. That is a pretty depressing statistic, considering how much of our lives we spend in our jobs. If we spend 40 hours a week, 48 weeks a year, over 40 years, that equates to almost nine full years in the office or factory. But every problem creates a marketing opportunity and there are plenty of authors eager to sell books telling us how our working lives can be improved. In “The Joy of Work: 30 Ways to Fix Your Work Culture and Fall in Love With Your Job Again”, Bruce Daisley offers a range of sensible, and jargon-free, solutions. The tone is very similar to the book “You Don’t Have To Be Crazy at Work” which I wrote up for the column  last year. Don’t work so hard that you lose sleep. Keep meetings short and limit them to small groups of people. Disconnect from your phone for a while. Have a break and take a walk. Interact socially with your colleagues in a relaxed atmosphere and you are more likely to co-operate fruitfully on a task. Give other people space to think and be creative. There is an irony in some of this sound advice. Mr Daisley works for Twitter, one of the great distractions from worker efficiency. Modern technology has had a terrible impact on the length of the effective working day. An American study found that 60% of professionals were remaining connected to work for 13.5 hours every week day and another five hours at weekend. A study by Tom Jackson of Loughborough University suggests we are interrupted by work emails around 96 times in an eight-hour day, or once every five minutes. The smartphone is an electronic Big Brother, straight out of George Orwell. Another feature of modernity is the dreaded open plan office, which may lead to reduced face-to-face communication. The author cites a study showing that people in open-plan offices also take more sick days. They are also interrupted every three minutes, on average, and it can take another eight minutes for their full concentration to return. By which time, of course, they have been interrupted again. At this point, workers may nod their heads sadly in agreement. The problem is that employers expect them to reply to their emails promptly, to be contactable at all times and stuff them in open-plan offices because it is a lot cheaper. There is not a lot the average Joe or Joanna can do in response. The same goes for meetings, which many are required to attend. Bartleby’s law is that 80% of the time of 80% of people in meetings is wasted. Mr Daisley comes up with a brilliant summary of the agony of sitting through long status reports from other departments: The main targets for Mr Daisley’s helpful suggestions are not employees, but managers. They forge the chains that bind us to our smartphones, or maroon us in pointless meetings. But it is also worth remembering one thing. We need to work, and we would be bored without it. But asking us to love it every single day is too much. On a grey Wednesday in January, when the train is packed and every other passenger is coughing up a lung, most of us have one thought: Friday is just two days away.