WHAT IS it about serial killers? Hockey-masked stalkers, knife-fingered slashers and chianti-sipping cannibals have long prowled across pages and screens. In the 1980s it was Hannibal Lecter (“Manhunter”) and Henry (“Henry: Portrait of a Serial Killer”); in the 1990s audiences feared Patrick Bateman (“American Psycho”), Ghostface (“Scream”) and Lecter (still going, in “The Silence of the Lambs”). There was a brief attempt to question this morbid fascination in the satirical films “Man Bites Dog” and “Natural Born Killers”, but that rather distracted from all the goring and the maiming. “Dexter”, “Hannibal”, “True Detective”, “Mindhunter” and “Luther” have joined the bloody business on the small screen in recent years. Watching individuals act with impunity can be both horrifying and gripping. Killing people without suffering much remorse is something murderers share with more legitimate heroes: the average James Bond movie, after all, has a kill count to match Ted Bundy’s, and shoot-em-ups such as “John Wick” revel in mass homicide. But this is a genre that is losing its edge. One scene in “Mindhunter”, a drama series based on the early years of criminal profiling at the FBI, was given over to finding a catchy name for the phenomenon, like Don Draper coming up with a new advertising slogan. Some killers—like Dexter—are presented as straightforward heroes. Lars von Trier, cinema’s chief provocateur, has tried to restore some shock and outrage to proceedings with “The House That Jack Built”. He has certainly done that—many critics walked out of a screening at Cannes film festival last year—but his film relies on the same tired tropes. Matt Dillon plays Jack, an amateur architect and serial killer, who is seemingly stitched together from the corpses of real figures. He uses a crutch to disarm people and is handsome like Bundy. He works under the pseudonym “Mr. Sophistication” and taunts the local press like the Zodiac Killer. He makes trophies of body parts like Ed Gein, and his childhood animal cruelty is one of the staples of the canon. Perhaps audiences are meant to find such familiarities eerie. Mr von Trier tries to persuade the viewer that there is artistry and method in the murder. Jack pontificates with Verg (Bruno Ganz), an unseen interlocutor, on the meaning of his “work”. The film is divided into chapters, each detailing an “incident”, alongside digressions on art, dessert wines and Nazi architecture, and supplemented by animation, video essays and footage from Mr von Trier’s previous films. Jack’s Manichean worldview supposes that dictators and serial killers—and Danish film directors, for that matter—are compelled to follow their violent, destructive and creative natures just as minority groups and women are destined to be their victims (this idea is only passingly interrogated by Verg). There is nothing especially original in this characterisation, either. Kevin Spacey’s killer in “Se7en” held similar pretensions. Jack is motivated by misogyny, like many real-life killers. An unnamed woman—played by Uma Thurman (pictured)—asks Jack for a lift when her car breaks down, and then casually riffs on how he might beat her face in with the tyre jack. She does so at such length that when he finally does, it feels like a weak punchline to an over-long joke. Other women are duped by Jack’s transparent impostures, leading Verg to ask why the women are “so stupid”. Jacks asks one victim: “Why is it always the man’s fault? If one is so unfortunate as to have been born a male, then you’re also born guilty. Think of the injustice in that.” He forces the woman, whom he has nicknamed “Simple”, to choose which knife he’s going to use to chop off her breasts. Whether this is misogynistic or intended as a depiction of misogyny is unclear, but the viewer’s attention stays focused on Jack while “Simple” becomes another grisly prop. Given that audiences have been subjected to this sort of thing for decades, writers and directors might consider a different approach. They might look back to a film in which the victim is the protagonist, a woman who receives 47 minutes of screen time prior to her murder. In that time, viewers learn about her life, they come to sympathise with her and like her (though she isn’t perfect). Her meeting with her killer comes as a tragic interruption, a brutal cutting-off. The power of Alfred Hitchcock’s genre-defining “Psycho” comes from the empathy it has for Marion Crane, and how heartlessly the perspective shifts to Norman Bates. That is, sadly, where the focus has been ever since.