LIFE EXISTS on two planes in Beirut. On one, people chat, smoke and sip, spilling out from bars in decrepit mansions, from juice joints and sleek bistros. But since it is often warm, this life happens on the street, so there is no escaping the second plane, where ragged children weave between knees, selling roses, gum or shoeshines. They deliver water and groceries from shops, struggling up stairs in buildings where the power often cuts out. They beg. They sweep barbershop floors and pack bags in supermarkets, working only for tips. There are little girls, ominously not selling anything—nothing visible, anyway. “Capernaum” takes a long, painful look at this world, blurring the lines between art and activism. Shortlisted for Best Foreign Language Film at the Oscars, the feature follows Zain, a skinny Lebanese boy around 12 years old. He is one of many children in a family too broke and too chaotic even to register their births. He works in a corner store, with a side hustle fraudulently picking up prescription drugs for his mother to cook down and sell. He curses fluently, filthily, ceaselessly. He adores his sister and erupts into tearful horror when his parents marry her off as soon as she begins menstruating. In his rage, he leaves home and sinks further into Lebanon’s underworld. “Many people say: ‘Oh, it’s too much. It can’t be’,” Nadine Labaki, the director—and the first Arab woman to be recognised by the Academy for a feature—says. “But this is the reality, unfortunately.” She has previously tackled Lebanon’s dysfunction in her work, writing and starring in “Caramel” (2007). Set in a beauty salon, that film gently sketched Lebanon’s devotion to beautification at the same time as highlighting the ugly aspects of a society still stiflingly conservative and divided. Ms Labaki is also involved in politics more directly. She joined Beirut Madinati (Beirut Is My City), a non-partisan group, which ran in municipal elections in 2016 on a platform that condemned corruption and sought improvements to Beirut’s rotten infrastructure. The group did not win, but performed respectably and continues to build grassroots support. “I know we didn't win because people are still scared of not belonging to a political party,” she says. Most Lebanese voters are influenced by sectarian and familial allegiances. “It's still very early for people to believe in an independent movement. Lebanon has been a culture of belonging.” She returned to film, believing in “the power of art, in the power of cinema and in really changing things”. Unable to ignore the destitute children eddying round her—“I felt like I was collaborating, in a way, in this crime”—Ms Labaki undertook research with charities working with the city’s poorest. Many street children are Syrian, part of the exodus fleeing the war; others are Palestinian, an impoverished underclass created by an older conflict. But while some ignore or refuse to believe it, Ms Labaki says there are Lebanese families every bit as desperate: “there are thousands and thousands of cases like [Zain’s]”. Based on what she saw, she says there are whole families where children are unregistered and uneducated. Some end up in prisons or detention centres, or married at a young age. Some die from neglect. With “Capernaum”, Ms Labaki seeks to draw attention to the weakness of the state and what she sees as an irresponsible society. She plays a lawyer in the film, answering Zain when he calls a television show asking to sue his parents for giving birth to him. “They didn't even ask to be here,” she says. “It's our world, our conflicts, our stupid decisions and stupid governments and failing systems.” The film’s own production underlines how difficult change would be. Zain is played by a Syrian refugee, Zain Al Rafeea, discovered by the casting team chasing chickens in the street, half-starved and long out of school. With a steady gaze alight with anger, his performance carries the film. But as he was technically in the country illegally, as were many of the other characters, Ms Labaki had to work closely with the United Nations to ensure that their work did not attract the attention of authorities who might have deported them. After shooting ended, Zain and his family were granted asylum in Norway. “He has a completely different life,” Ms Labaki says. “He has a beautiful house overlooking the sea.” Few children like him will get such a chance.