SINCE ITS foundation in 1895, the raison d’être of the National Trust, Britain’s premier conservation charity, has been to look after grand stately homes and breathtaking stretches of coastline. Among the more than 300 historic buildings in its care are Chartwell, the former home of Winston Churchill, and the ruins of Dunstanburgh Castle in Northumberland, the focus of fighting during the Wars of the Roses. Volunteers offer tours and specialist services like textile repair, and perform mundane tasks such as cleaning up litter. The trust aims to “preserve and protect the heritage at our places and spaces—for ever, for everyone”. At 124 years old, the organisation is in rude health. More than 5m Britons are members and plenty of new ones join every year. But the National Trust knows that if it is to keep up this momentum—and avoid charges of elitism—it must emphasise the “for everyone” part of its creed, and offer a more comprehensive definition of heritage. It is too often thought of as an institution for the country’s greying citizens, not trendy urbanites. Newer additions to the portfolio, such as Mendips and 20 Forthlin Road, the childhood homes of John Lennon and Paul McCartney, are helping to change that perception, but acquiring new properties is a slow and expensive business. So in recent years the National Trust has found a new strategy: curating events at locations that are not under its jurisdiction. This gives the organisation more geographic range, the freedom to explore new themes and periods, and the ability to appeal to different demographics. That feels particularly pertinent in diverse urban centres like London, says Laura Carderera, who leads a programme of events in the capital. When the National Trust was first set up, she explains, it was partly with the wellbeing of city-dwellers in mind: the primary focus of Octavia Hill, its founder, was on protecting green spaces “for the enjoyment, refreshment and rest of those who have no country house”. Ms Carderera believes that Hill’s ambition can be understood in more general terms, and that cultural spaces provide “enjoyment” and “refreshment” for urban populations, too. Since the scheme began in 2014, its projects have included tours of the unlovely outer London borough of Croydon as an exploration of 1960s post-war town-building, and an exhibition and immersive experience in Piccadilly inspired by the life of Lillian Ball, a Suffragette. In 2017, 50 years after the Sexual Offences Act which decriminalised homosexuality in private, it ran tours in Soho of LGBTQ heritage and club culture, ending with a visit to a recreated version of The Caravan, “London’s most bohemian rendezvous” (pictured, above). Now the National Trust has turned its attention to the India Club (pictured, top), a restaurant and bar that has served as a hub for Britain’s South Asian community since it was set up in 1951 (the club moved to its current premises on the Strand in 1964). It was a non-political adjunct to the India League, which campaigned for independence from Britain. The exhibition, “A Home Away from Home: The India Club”, hosted at the venue, has been in the works since 2018 when Ms Carderera’s team learned of a campaign to save the premises from development. They had been aware of the club’s importance—Historic England, a public body, listed the building in which it was first established—but became fascinated by its later social history. Journalists from nearby Bush House, the former headquarters of the BBC World Service, used the building on the Strand as a “second canteen”; dancers who met at rehearsals there returned to India to set up artists’ unions. The India Club was regarded as a “slice of London history that risked being lost”, and Ms Carderera received a small bursary from the British Library to train 20 volunteers to carry out oral history interviews, snippets of which can be heard in the exhibition. Full versions of the interviews will be available at the library in perpetuity, ensuring their safety as historical documents regardless of what happens to the India Club. (The building has been designated an asset of community value by Westminster Council, so is safe for the time being.) These “off-property” initiatives are having the desired effect. Volunteers who had not worked for the National Trust before signed up to research the India Club; Ms Carderera expects “A Home Away from Home” will attract new visitors, too. While 87% of visitors to National Trust properties in London and the south-east are card-carrying members, only 30% of those who attended “Queer City” held membership. Finding new subjects and new audiences is good for business, and it proves that conservation need not be conservative.