This is part of a one-week discussion on a second Brexit referendum, with ten contributors. The other contributions are available here. APPROACHING THREE years on, the government’s Brexit proposal doesn’t match up to what a successful Brexit looked like even to those who voted for it in the 2016 referendum. And many of the 48% who voted to remain look on in concern as the government postures that if its deal is not accepted by Parliament, Britain will depart on even more economically damaging terms. Members of Parliament have tried to develop other routes forward. Some have proposed a more off-the-shelf version of a soft Brexit, the Norway approach. Others have proposed a cleaner-break Brexit along the lines of the Canada Free Trade Agreement. But the significant drawbacks on sovereignty and economics means there is a blocking group of MPs for both these routes too. Parliament is gridlocked and this has been clear since July. However, neither the government nor the opposition has yet faced up to this fact. Parliament can and must now play a historic role to find a route through the gridlock. If Parliament cannot find a consensus, then it must trust the British public to choose and decide on a consensus for themselves. For this reason, I support a second referendum. As a democracy, Britain takes its big decisions at the ballot box. When we face big questions and choices about the future, we have votes, we ask people and we allow them to choose. That means allowing a referendum so the British people can find the consensus that Parliament has been unable to, between the three possible routes ahead for Britain: leaving the European Union (EU) with the prime minister’s deal; leaving the EU with no deal and applying World Trade Organisation rules by default; or simply keeping the current deal we have by staying in the EU. Far from being too complicated, a choice of more than two alternatives is what people expect in our country. Divisive, binary-choice politics may characterise American politics but it is profoundly un-British. The use of a first- and second-preference vote to find the best compromise option is how we elect our mayors, police commissioners and crime commissioners. It’s simply wrong to say this is somehow overly complicated for voters: it is not. In fact, it is the best way to find out the option that commands the most overall support. Designing and delivering a “consensus” referendum could be done in 22 weeks. It needs legislation which would require ten weeks to pass. The Electoral Commission work needed to design and deliver an effective referendum could be done in 11 weeks. Referendums can be delivered by Parliament by forcing a government to concede one as a condition for passing other government bills, as happened in the 1970s on devolution. Nevertheless, a government can also deliver this on a cross-party basis, finding the majority support for a referendum on the deal stretching across political parties in Westminster. Ministers will need to strike up a working relationship with like-minded MPs to deliver what in a way the prime minister and her cabinet have so far failed to do. But voters want to see a Parliament and political system that can act on its behalf across party lines where necessary. And they are rightly tired of Britain’s political system failing to deliver because of narrow party politics. Because of the unnecessary delays over the past six months, as the government continued down an obvious political cul-de-sac on its deal, a referendum will need an extension of Article 50 beyond the March 29th deadline. However, it need not be a significant period and could be as little as four months. Taking weeks of extra time to get a historical decision right that future generations will have to live with for decades is time well spent for Britain. The sooner we can resolve the huge uncertainty, the better for people and the better for business. This referendum could be better run and, unlike last time, voters should expect a full manifesto and detailed proposals from those seeking their support, just as they would expect in a general election. The British people deserve more than just abstract promises and negative politics about what will go wrong by voting for an opponent. Independent fact-checking and the costs of different options—the things we’d expect to see in a normal election—can better ensure an informed choice. What about the outcome? Whatever it is, we can implement it because this can be a binding referendum, unlike the original advisory one. Those who say a referendum on the three options now facing Britain is undemocratic could not be more wrong. The people cannot overrule themselves at the ballot box, unless they themselves have decided they want to change their vote. But that is democracy: it is their choice. And given that it is their choice, it is all the more important that people have the chance to exercise it. The will of the people is the will of the people. A gridlocked Parliament should accept that under those circumstances, its duty now is to enable a second referendum to happen. ____________ Justine Greening is the Conservative Party’s Member of Parliament for Putney, Roehampton and Southfields.