With the possible exceptions of race, sex and Theresa May’s dancing, no subject has inspired more hysteria in British politics than the referendum. In 1945 Clement Attlee denounced it as “alien to all our traditions” and an “instrument of Nazism”. Harold Wilson, the prime minister who would hold Britain’s first national referendum in 1975, had previously dismissed the idea as “contrary to our traditions” and “not a way in which we can do business”, scoffing that a referendum would probably abolish the income tax. His Conservative opponent, Margaret Thatcher, called the referendum “a device of dictators and demagogues” that would be dangerous to minorities and destructive of parliamentary sovereignty. So there’s nothing new in recent warnings, from Barry Gardiner on the left or Theresa May on the right, that a “People’s Vote” would be “a gross betrayal of our democracy” that “undermines the whole principle of democracy in this country”. Yet the referendum is now an established part of our constitution: for better or worse, a tool that has been used 12 times since 1973 can no longer be described as “alien to all our traditions”. From Harold Wilson to David Cameron, prime ministers have repeatedly called in the electorate as a political bomb-disposal unit, tasked with defusing explosive issues on their own backbenches. Yet in deploying the referendum as a tool of party management, they have failed to evolve any serious rules about when to use them, why or how. The history of Britain’s referendum debate offers some useful pointers, both on how we might use the device in future and on how a second referendum could avoid the pitfalls of the first. The referendum entered the mainstream of British debate in the early twentieth century, in a context not so different to the present. A fragmented Parliament had been rocked by a series of volcanic political questions—subjects, like votes for women, tariff reform and Home Rule for Ireland, that stirred passions which could not easily be contained within conventional party lines. For A.V. Dicey, the most distinguished constitutionalist of the late 19th and early 20th centuries, the referendum offered a partial solution. The device, he argued, would free great questions of policy from party or personal loyalties. To use a modern example, a voter could support Jeremy Corbyn as prime minister, while rejecting his views on Brexit. Crucially, for Dicey, the referendum was to be used to endorse or reject proposals that had already been approved in Parliament. He called this “the People’s Veto”, acting as a restraint on parliamentary adventurism, not as a means of compelling it to act. Resistance to that idea centred on three key criticisms. First, it was argued, referendums would reduce complex political questions to simple Yes/No propositions, overriding concerns about detail or the costs and trade-offs involved. To take another contemporary example: a referendum on David Cameron’s promise to reduce immigration to “the tens of thousands”, or to eliminate the structural deficit by 2015, might well have been carried; but the verdict would have said nothing about who should be excluded, or how the deficit should be closed. Second, critics warned of the danger to responsible government. Ministers, they predicted, would promise referendums for party purposes, while disclaiming responsibility for the result. A government that had been defeated in the country could continue cheerfully in office, enacting policies it did not believe in; while those who had actually argued for the change could wash their hands of its consequences. The result would be irresponsible government, removing a security against dishonest campaigning. Finally, it was feared that the referendum would promote authoritarianism. Voters who opposed its decisions would no longer be challenging a government or a political party; they would be pitting themselves against “the will of the people”. There would be little room for minorities under this system, or for the concept of “loyal opposition”. The 2016 vote fulfilled many of these fears. It reduced a question of mind-bending complexity to an abstract proposition, onto which voters could project incompatible versions of Brexit. It placed extraordinary power in the hands of two campaign vehicles that were under no responsibility to deliver on their promises; indeed, within days of the vote, the winning side had erased most of its website, like a drugs cartel torching the evidence before the police arrived. Moreover the 2016 vote has imported a theocratic principle into British politics, in which competing sects stalk the political landscape, warning heretics and unbelievers that “Brexit is our God, and Theresa/Boris/Jeremy is its prophet”. The result turbo-charged the most dangerous idea to which a democracy can fall victim: the fallacy that “the will of the people” forms a single, unitary intelligence, issuing instructions to which all must bend the knee. It is a fantasy made possible only by the ruthless suppression of dissenting voices, casting critics as traitors, MPs as “saboteurs” and judges as “enemies of the people”. Trying to solve the problems of one referendum by launching another might seem the political equivalent of drinking through a hangover. But Parliament is deadlocked and no party has a united position that it could put to a general election. We cannot break that deadlock by repeating the flawed exercise of 2016. But the Diceyan model of a “People’s Veto” offers something more hopeful. A vote on a concrete proposition, whether Theresa May’s deal, “Norway Plus” or an alternative, would focus debate on the strengths and weaknesses of a specific policy, not on the abstract utopias (and dystopias) that predominated in 2016. Its advocates would be those charged with implementing it, in the knowledge that their claims would be judged against results if they won. The principle of responsible government could be enhanced, not diminished, by such a vote. At present, both Mrs May and Mr Corbyn oppose a further referendum. If that changes, it will not be for reasons of constitutional principle, but because they cannot make a decision on Brexit without blowing their party to pieces. If we want to avoid deepening our political crisis, we need to think more carefully about the form such a referendum might take. The path from “the People’s Vote” to a “People’s Veto” marks a return to an older constitutional tradition. It might just turn the referendum from a problem into a solution. _______ Robert Saunders is a senior lecturer in history and the deputy director of the Mile End Institute at Queen Mary University of London. He is also the author of “Yes to Europe!: The 1975 Referendum and Seventies Britain,” among other books.