SOMETIMES THE biggest news out of the Supreme Court is that the justices have done nothing. That was the case on the morning of January 22nd, when the court’s 13-page list of orders in pending cases included not a word on litigation concerning Deferred Action on Childhood Arrivals (DACA), the Obama-era immigration programme that Donald Trump has been trying—unsuccessfully—to end. As a result of the justices’ inaction, some 700,000 DACA recipients who were brought by their parents illegally to America when they were children will, for the time being, keep their work authorisations and remain protected from deportation. Donald Trump’s plan to ditch DACA was announced by his first attorney-general, Jeff Sessions, in September 2017. In January, February and April of last year, federal district courts in San Francisco, New York and the District of Columbia each blocked Mr Trump’s plans, telling him he had not followed proper procedures in rescinding Mr Obama’s executive order. Agencies may not change regulations in “arbitrary and capricious” ways, the Administrative Procedures Act requires, and the three judges all ruled Mr Trump had not provided adequate justification for the wind-down. In August, a fourth judge in Texas unexpectedly rejected a direct challenge to DACA’s legality from several Republican states. DACA may have legal difficulties, Judge Andrew Hanen argued, but it would be wrong to end the policy at a stroke. "[T]he egg has been scrambled," Judge Hanen wrote. "To try to put it back in the shell...perhaps at great risk to many, does not make sense nor serve the best interests of this country”. Nevertheless, Mr Trump persisted, seeking permission from three circuit courts of appeal and from the Supreme Court itself to begin rolling back DACA protections. Having been rebuffed by the justices a year ago in its request for “certiorari before judgment”—a decision on DACA that would have leapfrogged the intermediate courts—the administration filed another such appeal in November 2018. The petition noted that if the circuit courts were permitted to take their usual time to issue rulings, America would be stuck with a bogus policy for far too long. (One of the tribunals, the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals, then released its ruling, unfavourable to Mr Trump, on November 8th.) It would be “at least a year”, the administration pleaded, before possible relief from the circuits came, and in the meantime, DACA’s existence would represent an “ongoing violation of federal law by more than half a million people”. Following the submission of briefs from both sides, the justices met privately on a pair of occasions in recent weeks to discuss Mr Trump’s extraordinary request for relief before the lower courts rendered their judgments. Twice—after conferences on January 11th and January 18th—the justices took no action, neither accepting the case for argument nor rejecting the plea. That means the appeal is still pending. But since mid-January is traditionally the cut-off point for the court to grant cases that it considers and decides before the close of its term at the end of June, it seems DACA recipients will be spared Mr Trump’s hoped-for rollback of the programme until at least the autumn and likely through the end of 2019, if not till June 2020. The silence on DACA from 1 First Street NE is good news for Dreamers (recipients of the protections) and bad news for Mr Trump. In addition to having his plans thwarted for still more months, the justices’ inaction removes a source of leverage Mr Trump hoped to use in negotiation with Democrats over how to end the partial government shutdown, now in its 33rd day. On January 2nd, Mr Trump noted that “if we win that [DACA] case” at the Supreme Court, “we’ll be easily able to make a deal on DACA and the wall as a combination”. Mr Trump has tried to broker such a deal in recent days: $5.7bn for his wall on the southern border in exchange for a three-year extension on protected status for Dreamers. But with DACA safe for now, thanks to the Supreme Court, that offer—salted with more worrisome measures apparently added by immigration hard-liners in Mr Trump’s circle—has lost its appeal.