THIS TIME, it was all about the tennis. When Naomi Osaka won her first major title at the US Open last September, her victory was overshadowed by a rules dispute between Serena Williams, her opponent, and Carlos Ramos, the umpire. But on January 26th the 21-year-old Japanese prodigy won her second consecutive grand slam, beating Petra Kvitova 7-6(2), 5-7, 6-4 in the final of the Australian Open. The victory will elevate Ms Osaka from fourth in the official world rankings to first, making her the youngest top-ranked player since Caroline Wozniacki claimed the position in 2010. Ms Osaka’s achievement offers a bit of welcome stability to the upper ranks of women’s tennis. She is the first player to win back-to-back majors since Ms Williams won three in a row in 2015, and her title in Australia ends an unprecedented string of eight consecutive grand slams in 2017-18 in which a different woman claimed each trophy. En route to her title in Melbourne, she edged out several of the other pretenders to the throne, including Elina Svitolina, a 24-year-old Ukrainian, and Karolina Pliskova, the 26-year-old Czech player who had ousted Ms Williams in a record-setting comeback one round earlier. Although plenty of work remains for Ms Osaka to distance herself from the pack, several signs indicate she is well positioned to do so. The most obvious is her age. In the last 15 years, the women’s tour has become much more veteran-dominated, making her one of only seven players under the age of 22 in the top 50. The days of teenage world-beaters are long gone, meaning that most players in Ms Osaka’s age cohort are still trying to find their footing in the professional game. Simona Halep, the Romanian who held the world’s top ranking for most of 2018, was still struggling to establish herself in the top 50 when she was Ms Osaka’s age. Few women have achieved as much as Ms Osaka while being so much younger than tour members as a group. The average age of the top 50 is about 27, nearly six years older than the back-to-back major winner. Only four other players since 1985 have won majors while they were at least 5.5 years younger than the mean of their peers: Ms Williams, Martina Hingis, Maria Sharapova, and Jelena Ostapenko, who won the 2017 French Open but failed to maintain her place in the top ten. None of those players matched Ms Osaka’s feat of following her first grand slam championship by winning another at the first opportunity, and only Ms Hingis claimed her second grand slam within a year of her first. It is too much to predict of any young player that she match the career accomplishments of Ms Williams, whose big-serving style Ms Osaka emulates. But even matching the more modest feats of Ms Hingis and Ms Sharapova, who are tied with five slams apiece, would rank her among the all-time greats. There is little risk that Ms Osaka will trace Ms Ostapenko’s disappointing path out of the limelight. Even before backing up her US Open title with a second major to open her 2019 campaign, Ms Osaka put together an outstanding full-season record. According to one aggregate metric, competition-adjusted “dominance ratio” (DR), her 2018 performance was second only to that of Ms Williams. DR is the ratio of a player’s return points won to her opponent’s return points won. Once adjusted for quality of competition, a DR of 1.0 represents a tour-average player, and a higher ratio is better. Ms Osaka’s mark for the entire season was 1.26, meaning that she won return points at a 26% better rate than she gave up to her opponents. Ms Williams’s adjusted DR was 1.29, and that of Ms Halep, who finished the year atop the ranking table, was third, at 1.25. By comparison, Ms Ostapenko’s DR in 2017, when she won at Roland Garros, was 1.08, behind dozens of tour regulars. Despite her string of successes in Paris, she failed to consistently beat top players, and when she did, she often defeated them by narrow margins. Ms Osaka’s 2018 season wasn’t perfect either, but her victories were more convincing and her losses were often hard-fought. Using the same metric, we can see how the Japanese star compares to other players who, in their youth, were destined for greatness. Among women at least four years younger than tour average, Ms Osaka’s DR of 1.26 is the best since Agnieszka Radwanska posted a 1.32 in 2010. (Ms Radwanska never reached the number one ranking or won a major, but did claim 20 tour-level titles and spent nearly a decade in the top ten.) In the last three decades, only 20 other players have recorded numbers as high while at least four years younger than tour average, and most of them went on to Hall of Fame careers. Some of those women, like Ms Hingis and Monica Seles, seemed to arrive on tour fully formed. Worryingly for her peers, Ms Osaka remains a work in progress, still demonstrating plenty of room for improvement. Her first serve, which averaged 105 mph in Melbourne and has peaked above 120 mph, is one of the fastest on tour, and is deceptive enough that in a 2018 mixed doubles match, she sent an ace flying past Roger Federer. But her second serve is as weak as her first is strong. In both the semi-final against Ms Pliskova and the final versus Ms Kvitova, her results behind her second ball were so poor that she would have been better off hitting only first serves, despite the additional risk that entails. Repairing that one glaring weakness would promote Ms Osaka from first among equals to a queen standing alone. A mere ten percent improvement in her second-serve winning percentage would bump her competition-adjusted DR to about 1.31, a mark that only three women—Ms Williams, Ms Sharapova, and Victoria Azarenka—have sustained for a full season in the last decade. With her latest title in Australia, Ms Osaka has entrenched herself among the sport’s elite. The question now is whether she’ll leave the rest of the pack a chance to catch up.