POLLS SUGGEST that a majority of Israeli voters do not want Binyamin Netanyahu, a prime minister bedevilled by allegations of corruption, to remain in office. Between them the country’s centrist parties are expected to win many more votes in elections on April 9th than Mr Netanyahu’s right-wing Likud party. But victory for Likud remains the likeliest outcome. Why is that? Israel’s electoral system of nationwide proportional representation, coupled with the fact that parties need just 3.25% of votes to enter parliament, has led to a proliferation of small parties in the Knesset, and all but ensures that no single party can ever create a government on its own. However, the leader of the largest party is generally regarded as the winner and has almost always formed a coalition. For nearly all of Israel’s history, the largest party has been either Labour or Likud. The duopoly was ended by the centrist Kadima party, which was formed by Ariel Sharon in 2005 and attracted politicians from both Labour and Likud. It swept into power the following year and led a ruling coalition until 2009, but was dissolved six years later, a victim of infighting and plummeting popularity. Labour has also lost much of its support and is now just one of a number of small parties fighting for the middle ground. Likud under Mr Netanyahu, on the other hand, revived its fortunes. In the election of 2015 three centrist parties got 35% of the vote between them; Likud, the single biggest party, got 23%. At least five centrist parties are planning to compete this year, and they could take advantage of voters’ disillusionment with Likud and its sister-parties—as well as the attractiveness of their own not overtly ideological platforms—to get over 40% of the vote. If they run together, offering one joint list of candidates, they could dwarf Likud and probably win the right to form a ruling coalition. (Right-wing and religious parties enjoy a small majority in the Knesset at present, but some of Mr Netanyahu’s partners could conceivably join a centrist coalition.) The problem for the centrists is leadership: they cannot find it. None of the leaders of the main centrist parties—Labour’s Avi Gabbay; Benny Gantz (pictured with Mr Netanyahu), a former general who has just formed a new party; and Yair Lapid, a talk-show host, who leads the populist Yesh Atid Party—see any of the others as meriting the premiership. At the same time, none believe in their own ability to beat Mr Netanyahu. They are more interested in creating independent fiefdoms, from which to launch their leadership bids after Mr Netanyahu’s departure from the political scene. That may not be too far away. Likud is likely to get a quarter of the seats in the next Knesset, which would give it a base on which to form another coalition. But the attorney-general is widely expected to charge Mr Netanyahu on counts of bribery, fraud and breach of trust relating to his dealings with businesspeople and media owners. Senior centrists, it would appear, prefer to wait for criminal indictments to unseat Mr Netanyahu, rather than take on the challenge themselves.