“IF KAMALA HARRIS wants people who care about dismantling mass incarceration and correcting miscarriages of justice to vote for her,” warned Lara Bazelon, a law professor, in an article published shortly after Ms Harris announced she was seeking the presidency last week, “she needs to radically break from her past.” Ms Bazelon charges that Ms Harris—who was a prosecutor before becoming California’s attorney-general in 2011 and California’s junior senator in 2017—fought to uphold wrongful convictions and supported excessively punitive policies and practices. Ms Harris faces similar criticism from across the left. On January 27th, in her first big campaign speech, in her hometown of Oakland, Ms Harris answered her critics not by disavowing her past, but by leaning in to it. Her slogan, “For the People,” is what prosecutors say in American courtrooms, because, as she explained, “in our system of justice, we believe that a harm against any one of us is a harm against all of us. That’s why when we file a case, it’s not filed in the name of the victim. It reads, ‘The People’”. Being “for the people”, she argued, means standing against “predators”, “big banks” and “transnational gangs,”—a careful bit of positioning that tries to cut into the anti-corporatism of Senator Elizabeth Warren, a rival for the Democratic nomination, and President Donald Trump’s law-and-order claims (“on the subject of transnational gangs, let’s be perfectly clear: the president’s medieval vanity project isn’t going to stop them”). That will not mollify her critics on the left. But Ms Harris is not running for president of Oakland or Madison or leftie Twitter. She decried mass incarceration and backed criminal-justice reform in her speech; to most Americans—to the restful or waking, rather than the “woke”—her experience as a prosecutor gives her more credibility, not less, as an advocate for those positions. And for all that her critics deride her as a “neoliberal,” the policy meat of her speech sounded like Bernie Sanders: Medicare for all, universal pre-K and debt-free college, middle-class tax cuts paid for with tax hikes on the rich and big corporations, strong unions, a pathway to citizenship for undocumented immigrants. These positions now seem to be essential for any Democrat who hopes to win the 2020 primary. A politician as disciplined and careful as Ms Harris can advocate them while running in the centre lane of the Democratic primary—as evinced by her law-enforcement background, her frequent professions of patriotism, and her belief, echoing Barack Obama, that “on the fundamental issues, we all have so much more in common than what separates us.” Yet that lane is not where it was when Mr Obama announced his campaign 12 years ago. Set aside the now mainstream policy priorities. Mr Obama’s announcement leaned heavily on Abraham Lincoln, and while he name-checked Martin Luther King junior, he otherwise steered clear of discussing racial inequity. Ms Harris, whose mother was Indian-born and father is Jamaican, quoted Frederick Douglas, and called out racial and gender-based pay gaps, the impact of mass incarceration on “black and brown Americans,” and her “fight for an America where no mother or father has to teach their young son that people may stop him, arrest him, chase him, or kill him, because of his race.” While she implicitly called for unity, she also pointed out that “the word unity has been used to shut people up or to preserve the status quo”—and the status quo, she argues, is not working for most people. It was a lawyerly speech, thoughtful and precise, laying out a well-constructed case against America’s direction under Mr Trump. The question now is how well she performs at small-state retail politics. Her victories have come in big, multi-ethnic California; her name recognition in the rest of the country remains scant. She will need to spend the next year wooing voters in early-primary states—while also fending off challenges and scepticism from her left. That is not an insurmountable challenge, but nor is it an easy one.