ROBERT MAPPLETHORPE did not plan to become a photographer. He was far too ambitious to pursue a medium that had so little respect in the art world. His first photographs, taken with a Polaroid camera he got as a gift in 1971, were simply material for his collages. But he was soon riveted by the pictures themselves. With a camera, he discovered he could shape his world into visions of startling beauty, whether his subject was an orchid, a friend or a penis. “If I had been born one hundred or two hundred years ago, I might have been a sculptor,” he once claimed. “But photography is a very quick way to see, to make a sculpture.” In this image-saturated moment, when nearly everyone is snapping and sharing photos, it is unexpectedly easy to discern what qualifies as art. Mapplethorpe’s work in particular stands out. Although he lived and worked amid the drugs and rabble of New York’s downtown bohemia, he created photographs that feel timeless, refined and luxurious. Because he was eager to prove that photography deserved the same respect as painting or sculpture, he applied his considerable technical skill to composing studio portraits, nudes and still lives in the formal language of classical works of art. His bold use of darkness and light recalls the chiaroscuro of Renaissance painting. His muscular bodies gleam like marble. The results are arresting and often exquisite; they are also unmistakably erotic. For example, “Ken and Tyler”, a platinum-palladium print from 1985, features two male nudes posed side by side against a black background. Mapplethorpe has cropped out the heads and raised arms, leaving their torsos and flexed legs, like idealised Greek statues. It is a mesmerising pas de deux, a graceful arrangement of echoing bodies, with a clear homoerotic charge. Other photographs, such as “Patrice” from 1977, which features the muscular leg, clenched fist and bulging jock strap of a man shot from the waist down, are less subtle but no less compelling. Mapplethorpe consistently presented taboo subjects in visually stunning ways. “I wanted people to see that even those extremes could be made into art,” he once said. Mapplethorpe’s self-portraits highlight the ways he used art to probe his own identity. The show includes a photo from 1980 (pictured) in which he looks like a macho greaser, with a leather jacket and extravagant pompadour. Another photo from that same year has him dressed as a woman, with glistening lips and a shawl of fur. These images are not merely comments on cultural archetypes, but earnest investigations of Mapplethorpe himself. In his self-portraits, he often seems both performative and vulnerable. He thought “the whole point of being an artist or making a statement is to learn about yourself”. Some of his photographs can still make viewers uneasy. The images of naked black men may be gorgeous, but they also raise uncomfortable questions about whether a white artist has the right to represent—and sexually objectify—a black man. Other photos, such as his notorious images of men involved in S&M, are considerably less racy in this highly “pornified” moment. Stripped of the noise of controversy, they are clearly more sympathetic than prurient. But they were enough to put Mapplethorpe’s work at the centre of a national debate over arts funding in America soon after he died. Anti-pornography advocates pushed the publicly funded Corcoran Museum in Washington, DC, to cancel what had been a successful touring Mapplethorpe show. Conservative lawmakers proposed cutting all government funding for the arts. “The conditions in which we make and present art now in the US are completely determined by that event,” says Stuart Comer, the chief curator of Media and Performance Art at the Museum of Modern Art. “We’ve never fully recovered from that.” Yet it wasn’t Mapplethorpe’s goal to shock. He was merely interested in bringing certain feelings and practices out of the closet, and presenting them in a way that was beautiful and without shame. Decades on, these images may no longer be scandalous, but they are still captivating. The first part of “Implicit Tensions: Mapplethorpe Now” is on view until July 10th. The second runs from July 24th to January 5th 2020