FOR all her fame as the Supreme Court’s eldest and pluckiest member—she has inspired biographies, exhibitions and films as well as a workout, memes and gags on “Saturday Night Live”—Ruth Bader Ginsburg’s fans may struggle to name a famous civil-liberties ruling that bears her name. There is one. Twenty-three years ago, Justice Ginsburg wrote the opinion that allowed women to apply to the Virginia Military Institute, America’s last all-male public university. But the sharp words that earned the diminutive justice the moniker “Notorious RBG” in recent years were penned in dissent, not for the court’s majority. Her memorable departures from her colleagues have come in rulings limiting abortion access and affirmative action, denying women equal pay, curbing contraception coverage and undermining the right to vote. Justice Ginsburg’s oeuvre of elegant dissents is a reminder that the Supreme Court did not suddenly become conservative when Donald Trump’s two picks landed in their chairs in 2017 and 2018. It has been that way throughout her 25-year stint on the bench. “On the Basis of Sex”, Mimi Leder’s powerful new film (written by Daniel Stiepleman, the protagonist’s nephew) portrays Ms Ginsburg a generation before Bill Clinton elevated her from the District of Columbia Circuit Court of Appeals to be America’s 107th justice. The 1960s and 1970s transformed the role of women in the law and the legal profession, and “RBG” would be key to many of the victories. The story begins in 1956 as 500 students stride into Langdell Hall for their first day at Harvard Law School. One of only nine women in the class, Ms Ginsburg (played with tenacity and vulnerability by Felicity Jones) fields a question from the dean, Erwin Griswold (Sam Waterston) at a term-opening dinner. Why, Mr Griswold asked the budding lady lawyers, are you occupying a spot that could have gone to a man? So she could be a “more patient and understanding wife”, Ms Ginsburg retorted; after all her husband Marty Ginsburg (Armie Hammer) was a member of the second-year class. She navigates motherhood, Marty’s testicular cancer and sexist insults before tying for first in her class at Columbia Law School (she followed Marty to New York where he landed a job as a tax attorney). Yet Ms Ginsburg finds herself shut out of jobs. Being a “woman, a mother and a Jew to boot”, as one potential employer puts it in the film, the legal wunderkind had three strikes against her. Ms Ginsburg eventually accepts a position at Rutgers Law School, where she taught from 1963 to 1972, and where her role as a trailblazer for gender equality was born. “On the Basis of Sex” zeroes in on Moritz v Internal Revenue Service, the first case involving gender discrimination Ms Ginsburg would tackle—and the first case of any kind she would litigate. Choosing a tax case in a Colorado circuit court with stakes of under $300 as the lynchpin for a feature film may sound like an odd choice. Why didn’t the film-makers opt to focus on one of Ms Ginsburg’s half-dozen Supreme Court arguments on gender inequality (of which she won five)? For good reason. The easily overlooked Moritz brought attention to the Ginsburg marriage—an exemplary relationship of talented, loving equals that bears out the film’s arc. The case came to Ruth on Marty’s recommendation and the couple argued it side by side. Moritz was also a perfect example of the strategy that would inform Ms Ginsburg’s effort as head of the Women’s Rights Project at the American Civil Liberties Union: choosing one case at a time in which an individual suffered an injury due to a law that drew arbitrary distinctions between men and women. The offending law in Moritz was a section of the Internal Revenue Code allowing working women to deduct funds spent on nursing care for elderly parents. The deduction was also available to men—but only if they had been married and divorced or lost their wives. Charles Moritz, a never-married travelling salesman caring for his 89-year-old mother in Denver, thought he deserved a tax break, too. The IRS thought otherwise, as did the US tax court. At the Tenth Circuit Court of Appeals, the Ginsburgs teamed up to argue that Mr Moritz had been denied the equal protection of the law by Congress’s baseless differentiation between men and women. Against the federal government’s formidable defence of the targeted deduction—which included a list of 178 laws that would come under a cloud of unconstitutionality if Mr Moritz prevailed—the Ginsburgs persuaded the panel of three judges to expand the tax benefit to all caregivers, irrespective of their gender. It is a credit to the film that it manages to turn the run-up to a tiny tax case into gripping cinema. And it is a credit to Ms Ginsburg—along with her forebears, including New York feminist lawyer Dorothy Kenyon (played by Kathy Bates)—that she developed a brick-by-brick litigation strategy that would, as she put it to the justices in 1973, ultimately take men’s “feet off our necks”. It is no accident that the plight of hand-picked male plaintiffs helped to forge this change. Showing all-male panels of judges that gender stereotypes hurt men and women alike was essential to the fight. The Moritz strategy, Ruth says in the movie, “could topple the whole damn system of discrimination”. Sure enough, in 1976, in another case challenging discrimination against men (this one involving access to beer), the Supreme Court ruled that all gender distinctions in the law should be regarded with heightened suspicion. Sauce for the gander was sauce for the goose. With gender equality duly protected under the 14th Amendment, women made great strides over the coming decades. One sign of the shift: women made up only 2% of the Harvard Law class of 1959, but in 2019, more women than men now attend law school in America. With Justice Ginsburg (now a three-time cancer survivor) approaching her 86th birthday, five conservatives commanding a majority on the Supreme Court and two years to go in Donald Trump’s first term, women’s rights seem to be on a less secure footing in 2019 than the trajectory begun in the 1970s would have plotted. It seems doubtful, too, that the next challenge to discrimination—protecting transgender Americans—will soon find a friendly audience at the Supreme Court. But “On the Basis of Sex” brings a measure of hope to viewers who cheer the revolution in gender equality the past half-century has wrought. As the engraving over the Tenth Circuit’s bench reads, “reason is the soul of all law”; intelligence, teamed with ferocity and compassion—even against tall odds—can change the world.