WHILE LOUDLY demanding funds to build a wall on the southern border, the Trump administration has more quietly implemented a range of policies to restrict legal immigration. That might cheer President Donald Trump’s political base. But it could also carry a political cost: the effort has encouraged documented residents to apply for citizenship, potentially adding numbers to a block of voters who are overwhelmingly opposed to the president. The administration has launched a multi-pronged attack on legal immigration. It has barred spouses of immigrants entering on visas for high-skilled workers from employment and slashed the number of refugees America will accept each year from a limit of 110,000 in the last year of the Obama administration to 30,000 for 2019. It has allowed immigration officers to reject visa applications with missing information without giving applicants a chance to correct the error. And non-citizens who apply for an extension or change of status, permanent residence, or citizenship are now placed in deportation proceedings if their application is unsuccessful. Immigration authorities have started combing old citizenship applications for fraud, with the intent of rescinding citizenship if any evidence is found. Under proposed rule changes it will be easier for immigration officials to deny visas to individuals based on the fact they might become a “public charge” by using the welfare system. And the administration has also explored the idea of ending the right of citizenship to anyone born on American soil. Mr. Trump’s rhetoric and these enforcement changes have created concern among approximately 8.8m legal permanent residents in American with the right to apply for citizenship through a naturalisation process. In a recent paper, Catalina Amuedo-Dorantes of San Diego State University and Mary J. Lopez of Occidental College looked at what greater immigration enforcement did to rates of naturalisation across America between 2008 and 2016, which might provide a foretaste of the impact of the Trump administration’s policies on future citizenship applications. The researchers examined whether naturalisation applications were higher in states and counties that implemented mechanisms including the E-verify programme (which enforced immigration status checks on new employees) or participated in the Secure Communities programme (which empowered the federal government to check the immigration status of anyone arrested by local police). They found that tougher enforcement did increase the likelihood that a legal permanent resident would start the naturalisation process. But the researchers also found that in households that appeared to include an undocumented member, the chance that a legal resident started the naturalisation process was lower under intensified enforcement, because households were keen avoid contact with authorities for any reason. Overall, enforcement had little impact on total applications. Right now, however, it appears that the Trump administration is driving more people to apply for citizenship. The latest Yearbook of Immigration Statistics from the Department of Homeland Security suggests that the number of naturalisation petitions climbed from 783,062 in 2015—the year before the presidential election—to 986,851 in 2017. Thanks to the rising number of applications and closer scrutiny by immigration officials, it is taking longer to complete the citizenship process. By mid-June 2018, the waiting time to process a citizenship application had climbed above ten months, from six months in 2016. The case backlog reached 750,000 in March 2018. As a result, the number of citizenships granted has actually fallen (from 730,259 in 2015 to 707,265 in 2017). At some point, however, rising applications will translate into a growing stream of new citizens—and new voters. In 2016 naturalised citizens supported Hillary Clinton over Mr Trump by 64% to 31%. It seems doubtful many have warmed to the president since then.