IT WAS the show that proved to film-makers and movie stars that “prestige TV” could be where they stand out. The first season of “True Detective”, which premiered on HBO four years ago, was cinematic and beautifully shot with compelling performances. Somewhat unusually for American television at the time, it was a self-contained story that would run for only eight episodes, a format friendly to stars who were wary of the small screen. For lead actor Matthew McConaughey, it confirmed the “McConaissance”. Like a blockbuster film, the show was a cultural sensation. Nic Pizzolatto, the show’s creator, has since tried twice to recreate that sensation, with brooding, toxically masculine heroes confronting evil while wrestling with their own demons. The second season of “True Detective”, starring Colin Farrell, Rachel McAdams and Vince Vaughn, featured capable but not outstanding performances. It had more violence than the first while lacking direction; its storyline was complex and confusing. The third season, which premiered on January 13th, has been received by some enthusiasts as a return to form. It is at least a return to the format. Like the first season, its central mystery unfolds in multiple timelines: two children go missing in a small town in Arkansas in 1980, and the viewer follows the case’s twists and turns in 1980, 1990 and 2015 through the ageing eyes of Wayne Hays, a moody, laconic detective and Vietnam veteran (played by Mahershala Ali). As this season’s McConnaughey figure, Mr Ali delivers a convincing turn. Ever a magnetic presence on screen, he holds the viewer’s attention with his intensity, even when he has to communicate meaning with silence (something called for frequently in Mr Pizzolatto’s scripts). The other performances are solid, including Stephen Dorff as Hays’s partner, Roland West—the Woody Harrelson role from the first season. But what the new iteration of “True Detective” reveals, in the five episodes available for review, is that Mr Pizzolatto’s formula suffers without the support of lush cinematography and career-making performances. He sets the story in a milieu thick with potential for drama—a black cop in a white-dominated police force in the deep south—but takes only superficial shots at exploring racial tensions (in part this may be because Hays was meant to be a white detective, with a black partner, until Mr Ali lobbied successfully for the role). At one point Hays accuses West of not backing him up with superiors on account of race. The father of a missing child apologises to West for using a racial epithet to describe Hays, to which West responds: “He’s been called a lot worse by people who meant it a lot more”. West thrives in his career while Hays flounders. But such tantalising notes stand on their own as miniature set pieces. They do not, as yet, appear to invest the larger story with deeper meaning. Similarly Hays’s relationship with his wife (in 1990) is meant to be understood as tense and complex, but the on-screen manifestations are superficial: he gets unreasonably angry with her, betraying his insecurities; she stands her ground; they have sex. In the first season director Cary Fukunaga’s rolling shots of the Louisiana bayou and slow, lingering takes of creepy crime scenes primed audiences for Mr McConaughey’s hypnotic delivery of cryptic aphorisms like “time is a flat circle”. It did not matter that the mystery at the heart of the story ultimately proved unsatisfying in its resolution, that in the end its mythmaking was for naught. The show’s mystical, foreboding aura made it a hit. Mr Fukanaga fell out with Mr Pizzolatto during the first series. Without Mr Fukunaga's artistry, “True Detective” needs its central mystery to pay off to be worth the watch. That is possible this time: the criminal investigation takes intriguing turns in episodes three, four and five. But “True Detective” is meant to be a human drama, as much about examining the nature and challenges of its titular hero as about cracking a case. The mystery that remains to be solved is whether Mr Pizzolatto can make that formula work on his third try.