WILBUR ROSS, the secretary of commerce, has offered a number of different, unconvincing reasons for his decision to include a citizenship question on the decennial census that will be conducted in 2020. On January 15th, Jesse Furman, a judge in New York’s southern district, pointed this out as he ordered the Trump administration to remove the question. In a scathing and meticulous ruling, he said Mr Ross had “alternately ignored, cherry-picked or badly misconstrued the evidence in the record before him; acted irrationally both in light of that evidence and his own stated decisional criteria”. The secretary of commerce had, he wrote, “failed to justify significant departures from past policies and practices”. All this amounted to a “veritable smorgasbord of classic, clear-cut” violations of the Administrative Procedure Act (APA), a law governing how agencies are to undertake regulatory changes. Mr Ross, whose agency supervises the Census Bureau, had in March 2018 ordered that a citizenship query (“Is this person a citizen of the United States?”) be included. He said the Department of Justice (DoJ) had requested the information in order to enforce section 2 of the Voting Rights Act. That was a curious rationale. The DoJ already had access to such information through the American Community Survey (ACS), a smaller effort conducted by the Census Bureau each year. It later emerged that Mr Ross came up with this justification after he had decided to include the question, following discussions with Steve Bannon, the president’s adviser at the time, and Kris Kobach, Kansas's former secretary of state and another immigration hardliner. Civil rights groups (and Democratic state attorneys-general) were quick to suspect that something else was going on. It is well established that asking about citizenship substantially decreases the response rate of Hispanic American households. In households that, as one witness in the trial put it, include people with a “variety of citizenship statuses”, respondents may worry that their answers would be shared with immigration authorities. That could lower the apparent population counts in predominantly Democratic areas by “hundreds of thousands—if not millions” of people, according to Judge Furman. Such undercounts could affect decennial reallocation of congressional seats. The Fourteenth Amendment requires that “representatives shall be apportioned among the several states according to their respective numbers, counting the whole number of persons in each state”—and the Supreme Court has long held that this includes citizens, green-card holders and undocumented immigrants alike. Population figures calculated by the census also determine the flow of hundreds of billions of federal dollars to the states. The Census Bureau’s own analysis concluded that the initial response rates of non-citizen households could drop by as much as 5%. They also concluded that Hispanic responses would drop, but could not quantify the magnitude of this decrease. Whether the effect would have been so large as to actually affect the number of seats states got in Congress is unclear. Establishing a motive to discriminate is difficult. Even with the internal analyses showing significant drops in response rate, the judge did not find enough evidence to substantiate such a charge. Mr Ross’s order was instead nullified based on ample evidence showing he violated the guidelines of the APA. Though civil rights groups might have hoped for a stirring judgment rooted in constitutional violations, the statutory basis of Judge Furman’s ruling is more difficult to contest. That will make it likelier to survive appeal. A court sympathetic to President Donald Trump’s administration might find it easy to argue that Mr Ross actually harboured no ill will towards Hispanics when he made his decision; judges will find it much harder to argue that he followed the laws governing regulatory changes to the letter. Where does this dispute go from here? The government’s typical path for appeal would begin at the Second Circuit Court of Appeals, with possible review by the Supreme Court months or years later. But with the census due to be sent out next year—and questionnaires printing over the summer—things are likely move more quickly. It seems a Supreme Court hearing planned for February involving a technical question in the case could be called off, because Judge Furman did not rely on disputed evidence in rendering his judgment. But the government could file a petition for “certiorari before judgment”—leapfrogging the circuit court given the expediency required—and the justices could hear the full case on the merits this spring, with a decision by the end of June. Much of the angst over the coming census has centred on the contentious citizenship question. Yet there are other reasons for alarm. The typical increase in funding in the years before the decennial count has not materialised, forcing the agency to cancel two of its three test runs. Funding for partnerships and advertisements needed to reach hard-to-count populations—like Native Americans on reservations—may dry up. All of this is happening in the same year that the census undergoes a big transformation, from paper to internet. Compared with a citizenship question, these concerns seem humdrum. But their damage could still be considerable. A bad census cannot be redone.