IN THE opening scene of “When We Have Sufficiently Tortured Each Other”, a new play by Martin Crimp, a couple sits in a black Audi parked in a garage crammed with tools, coats and boots. The man calmly explains to the woman, whom he has abducted, why she should have sex with him. “Let’s face it Pamela: you’re a child—and I’m a man. I have power, and you have none.” Plenty of girls would sleep with him for “a couple of dresses”, he says, but he is willing to give her much more than that: a contract entitling her to two diamond rings, “a gift of property” and “a lifetime annuity”. The conversation is jarring not simply because the man is odious, but because his inducements are antiquated. The play—at the National Theatre in London—is loosely based on “Pamela”, a novel written in the 18th century by Samuel Richardson. The titular figure is a 15-year-old maidservant whose breathtaking beauty and resolute virtue drive Mr B, her libertine master, to kidnap and attempt to rape her. Gradually, however, he is seduced by her kindness, wit and charm; they eventually fall in love and marry. Though “Pamela” ends happily, feminist critics and contemporary readers may question whether what flourishes between the pair is indeed love. Power is unequally distributed: Pamela is a woman with no family of standing to protect her, Mr B is a wealthy aristocrat and justice of the peace. With his provocative new play, Mr Crimp has attempted to answer such doubts. He suggests that love does not merely thrive on power imbalances—sometimes it relies on them. Soon it becomes apparent that though the woman on stage wears a frilly maid’s outfit, she is far from the girl of Richardson’s imagining. “My name’s not Pamela,” she says, “and look at me: I am not a child.” She is a 21st-century woman, played with a skittish energy by Cate Blanchett. She refuses to sleep with the man not because she wishes to protect her virtue—she has no truck with such outdated mores—but because she wants to provoke him into forcing himself on her. “I’d rather be raped than bored,” she says with a studied nonchalance. Richardson's Pamela fought tooth and nail to withhold her body from Mr B. By contrast, her modern counterpart invites the man to abuse her. He is aghast: “No woman would say that.” He gets out of the car. What was first described as an abduction has morphed into something more complicated. The bondage gear worn under their outfits suggests they may be acting out a sexual fantasy, in which the woman plays the part of Pamela and the man her master. This scene—one of 12 “variations” on “Pamela”—provides the first, most shocking indication that Ms Blanchett’s character thinks and acts in ways that many modern women, who epouse notions like “girl power” and self-determination, would find troubling. Reading her diary, her male partner discovers that she believes love is an act of submission on the part of the woman, and an act of dominance on the part of the man. Some would argue that the patriarchy is “putting words in her mouth”, she later says, but, well, that’s “who I am”. Over the course of the play, the man and woman (who are never named) nick each other with their words. He wants to convince her that her proper place is by his side—but this is not enough for her. She ridicules his masculinity, hoping to crack his veneer of civilisation and unleash the violent brute inside. Eventually he breaks, and slaps her. It is not a grave assault, but it is enough to satisfy her. They marry. You can almost feel Mr Crimp—often described as a practitioner of “in-yer-face” theatre—goading his audience. The woman’s view of the proper relations between the sexes harks back to a time before the rights of women were enshrined in law, when men like Mr B could by and large have their way with the women of their choosing. Her dismissal of gender equality, and fetishisation of female sexual submission, feels like a stinging rebuke of feminism. How this woman could have acquired anachronistic views and an extreme sexual politics might have been explored, but she is so caught up in her vicious pas de deux that the audience never learns anything about her past. This is one of several problems afflicting the play. The relationship between the characters and Richardson’s novel remains unclear: sometimes it seems they’re channelling Pamela and Mr B as part of an elaborate sex game; at others it seems that they are modern-day versions of the couple. This slipperiness is exacerbated by the fact that many viewers will be unfamiliar with the plot of “Pamela” (your correspondent’s guest had not read the novel and was bamboozled). Though the dialogue is filled with razor-sharp barbs and much of the acting is brilliant, it appears that Mr Crimp was so preoccupied with exploring his ideas about sex, gender and power that he overlooked the audience’s desire for fully realised characters in well-spun stories. “Pamela” remains ripe for a modern retelling. “When We Have Sufficiently Tortured Each Other” is showing at the National Theatre until March 2nd