 IN AN AGE where religious dissidents can face flogging or death in Saudi Arabia, re-education camps in China and dubious terrorism charges in Russia, good tidings about liberty of belief are hard to come by. But on January 29th a flash of welcome news came from Pakistan. The country’s highest court reaffirmed an earlier decision to acquit a Christian woman, Asia Bibi, of blasphemy charges which had led to her spending eight years on death row. She was convicted in 2010 of insulting the Prophet Muhammad after a squabble with her Muslim neighbours and fellow fruit-pickers over a shared bucket of drinking water. For critics, the case epitomised the cruelty of Pakistan’s blasphemy laws, which make it easy for humdrum personal quarrels to be elevated into life-or-death court cases. At least 40 other people have been imprisoned under Pakistan’s vaguely worded legislation which prescribes death for anyone who casts aspersion on the name of Islam’s founder, even in the most indirect way. Ms Bibi was first acquitted last October, but the government backed away from freeing her unconditionally after a wave of rioting orchestrated by an ultra-zealous Islamist political party, Tehreek-e-Labbaik Pakistan, which continued to demand her death. The party’s leader was among those arrested after the riots and remains in prison. Under a bargain with the protesters, the government agreed to ask the Supreme Court to review her acquittal and to prevent Ms Bibi from leaving the country pending those proceedings. The public response to this latest decision has been more muted than it was in October, with the Pakistani authorities seemingly better prepared to withstand an onslaught. The case has triggered an international furore, with the accused woman’s husband Ashiq searching for a country which was prepared to offer her asylum and risk the ire of Islamic extremists (Canada, Spain and France are thought to have offered asylum). She is most likely to go to Canada, where two of her children have reportedly moved this week. Britain’s Foreign Office admitted that it had not granted Ms Bibi asylum for fear of endangering its own staff in Pakistan. The move prompted protests from politicians and religious leaders in Britain who insisted that the country should not allow itself to be intimidated. Although Pakistan’s blasphemy laws enjoy some support in the country’s diaspora, including in Britain, several British imams urged the government to take Ms Bibi in and face down the extremists. A representative for Amnesty International, a London-based human-rights body, urged the Pakistani authorities to implement the verdict swiftly. She said: “Asia Bibi must finally get her freedom and an end to her ordeal. After nine years behind bars for a crime she didn’t commit, it is difficult to see this long overdue verdict as justice. But she should now be free to reunite with her family and seek safety in a country of her choice.”