Dreams of El Dorado: A History of the American West. By H.W. Brands. Basic Books; 544 pages; $32 GOLD IS AT the heart of any good history of the American West. In H.W. Brands’s new telling, it is forged by tectonic plates in the veins of the Sierra Nevada mountains, rising to a concentration of 100m parts per billion (rather than the usual five). It is the fantasy that drives Coronado, a Spanish explorer, to Texas in 1540, and the pretext for white seizure of the Black Hills of the Dakotas that led to Sioux victory at the Battle of the Little Bighorn in 1876.  “Dreams of El Dorado” would seem to have found a powerful theme. But these events are mere nuggets in a stuffed survey whose dash across the centuries will leave readers both fascinated and frustrated. Mr Brands, a professor at the University of Texas known for bestselling biographies of Teddy Roosevelt and Andrew Jackson, crams in everything of import that occurred between the Louisiana Purchase of 1803 and the turn of the 20th century. The result is a perplexing book, full of vividly told tales yet bizarrely stuck in the outmoded framework of “great (white) man” history. Mr Brands tells stories well. His bite-sized tales of bravado trot through the lives of men whose names cover the map: Houston, Austin, Crocker, Ogden and Huntington, to name a few. He provides a sound early history of the little-known British and American fur trade in the Rocky Mountains, the first truly global American industry, with “supply chains that spanned oceans and continents”. Equally interesting is his summary of the war with Mexico that, just months before the discovery of the Mother Lode gold deposits, yielded the United States the vast and valuable new territory of California. The book is also a useful primer to the tides of emigration across the Mississippi, from the hardships of the Oregon Trail to the Mormon trek, drawn from letters and journals and often harrowing in their details. Many early pioneers, it seems, were chancers fleeing debt and disease in the east, including Moses Austin and Peter Burnett, who would become the first governor of California. From time to time, unexpected stories dazzle: Chinese labourers building the Central Pacific Railroad persuaded overseers to let them weave reed baskets in which to suspend men planting explosive charges in the rock. Gold Rush San Francisco is a pit of vice, Mr Brands shows, citing the Australian ex-convict mob called the “Sydney Ducks” who sailed in to “execute villainies that in magnitude and violent character far exceeded those for which they had been originally convicted”. The danger of such a rapid survey is lack of depth and nuance. Many tales cover just a few pages, as if written for today’s challenged attention spans. More grievously, Mr Brands largely recycles a traditional, triumphalist view of “how the West was won”. Only a handful of women speak for themselves, while Native Americans are portrayed as doomed figures, alternately violent or heroic. Mr Brands vividly reconstructs two dramatic events, for instance: the Lewis and Clark expedition of 1804-06 and the massacre of the Whitman missionary family by the Cayuse tribe in 1847. Both are told through Anglo-American eyes, despite the existence of indigenous accounts in the archives. His profiles of Native Americans come late in the day and largely focus on the major “Indian Wars” of the late 1870s: Custer and Chief Joseph, the Sioux and Comanche. Yet almost nothing is reported about the treaty-making and government lies that preceded these military conflicts. The process by which tribes “had been compelled to sign away most of their lands and settle on reservations” remains opaque. The reader may yearn for context and analysis in a subject of such complexity and importance. The author does frequently note the violence of American conquest. “Americans, like most people, are easily flattered,” he writes, “and Manifest Destiny was flattery in its most seductive form. It cast American self-interest as a providential imperative.” Even so, he often lets racist views pass without comment. Inevitably, the question arises of how to evaluate the actions of forebears whose values society now condemns. One solution, noted by Kelly Lytle Hernandez, a historian and one of the recipients of this year’s MacArthur “genius” grants, is by unearthing and including the perspectives of those omitted from the standard record, “bringing our story and our experience to the centre of the American narrative”. Like Henry Louis Gates junior’s recent reassessment of Reconstruction, or “The Heartbeat of Wounded Knee”, a retelling of Native American history (reviewed here), more inclusive histories are truer histories—albeit messier and less heroic.