HALFWAY BETWEEN Moscow and the Pacific Ocean sits the city of Krasnoyarsk. At its heart, on the banks of the mighty Yenisei, stands a brutalist building encased in granite. Built in 1987, it was the last of the Lenin Museums that the Soviet Union bestowed on deserving provincial cities to showcase the achievements of socialism. It is now an art museum. And when night falls, giant letters are projected onto one of its stark walls: SVOBODA. Svoboda, or freedom, is not the first thing which springs to Western minds at the mention of Siberia; the vast region is more readily associated with fetters, exile and suffering. Nor is it a word much associated with present-day Russia. But it is a word that fits.  The projection on the side of the Krasnoyarsk museum is at least as much about geography as politics: a tribute to Siberia’s limitless expanse, its high skies and rivers that flow so fast and so deep that their water will steam rather than freeze. It is a historical statement, too—Siberia has been seen for centuries, by visitors and inhabitants alike, as a place of freedom. But by the same measure it is also an ironic one: Siberia was a place of punishment and exile long before the Soviet Gulag. Inside the museum you will find a lot more irony. An artistic movement called “Siberian ironic conceptualism” is well represented. “Irony and self-irony is a mode of survival in Siberia,” says Vyacheslav Mizin, an artist from Novosibirsk. He and his partner, who style themselves “The Blue Noses”, produce pieces which populate the Siberian landscape with American rock stars, poking fun at state propaganda and liberal fetishes alike. If you are incapable of irony, Mr Mizin says, “you turn beastly. The harder the conditions, the more you need it.” Whether the conditions are climatic, political or spiritual goes unsaid. This Siberian school is less intellectual than the conceptual art you find in Moscow. It is more coarsely grotesque and openly mocking. It embodies a Siberian belief held far beyond the world of art galleries: that Siberia is both the essence of Russia and separate from it. The movement’s most famous piece is called “United States of Siberia”. In the early 2010s Damir Muratov, an artist from Siberia’s ancient capital, Tobolsk, some 1,500km west of Krasnoyarsk, took an old wooden door and painted it with green and white horizontal stripes, a field of snowflakes in the top left corner. It was a homage to the American painter Jasper Johns, who in the 1950s first posed the question of whether a painting of a flag was something different from the flag itself—and if so, what, if anything, such somethings symbolised. Mr Muratov’s painting was similarly not a flag. It did not represent a country—merely suggested one—and it did not fly free in the wind. For Mr Muratov, the wind is the essence of a flag. “The most important thing is the movement of air,” he says. “Where there is a wind, there is a flag.” But because the windless wooden painting still looks like a flag, it is clearly asking to be taken as a symbol: of a non-state, of artistic freedom, of an anarchy free from any authority other than the endless horizons of the Taiga forests and the patterns of falling snow. The symmetries between Siberia and North America date back centuries. Russia’s colonisation of Siberia began in the reign of Ivan the Terrible—roughly at the same time as Elizabethan England began to explore its new world. Siberia’s Walter Raleigh was an audacious Cossack called Yermak. Previously a raider on the Volga river, he was hired by the Stroganov family in a bid to expand its fur trade by taking on the Khanate of Sibir. In 1582, accompanied by about 800 men, he crossed the Urals and established a foothold in Siberia. He drowned three years later, but Russia’s expansion continued at a breakneck speed, pushing aside Mongolian Buryats, Turkic Yakuts, Samoyedic Nenets and other indigenous, or at least established, peoples. By 1648 the territory under their sway stretched all the way to the port of Okhotsk on the Pacific coast. Much less is known of Yermak than of, say, Raleigh or Sir Francis Drake. But a lack of detailed biography is no obstacle to becoming a folk hero. In the romantic mythology of the 19th century he came to embody the energy and enterprise of the free settlers who had moved east into a land where serfdom was never imposed, fighting, mixing and assimilating with those who the cossacks had displaced as they did so. As Nikolay Yadrintsev, a 19th century historian who did much to create the region’s founding myths, wrote: “Siberia, in its origin, is a product of an independent, rather than state-driven, movement and of the creative forces of the people…that was later hijacked and regimented by the state.” Regimented—and exploited. Its claim on the lands taken by Yermak and his Cossacks transformed Muscovy, a second-tier duchy, into the world’s largest continental empire. Over the following centuries the bounty of Siberia sustained the Russian, Soviet and post-Soviet empires. A source of valuable furs and salt in the 17th century, precious metals and gold in the 19th century, and oil and gas in 20th century, the vastness of Siberia was to Russia something akin to what the west was to America. It felt similar, too. “My God, how far removed life here is from Russia,” Anton Chekhov wrote as he travelled across Siberia. “I really felt I wasn’t in Russia at all, but somewhere in Patagonia or Texas.” A key difference, though, is that Russia has not moved beyond the extraction of riches from these empty lands. Up to three-quarters of what the country exports comes from Siberia. The rents extracted from these various trades still allow Russia to deal with economic crises without modernising its economy or renouncing autocracy and state monopoly, just as they did in centuries past. In a book published in 2003, Clifford Gaddy and Fiona Hill (more noted, recently, for her testimony to Congress during the hearings on the impeachment of President Donald Trump) call this “The Siberian Curse”. Siberia’s size, its extreme climate and its misdevelopment by Russian rulers, they argue, hold all of Russia back. “In essence,” they sum up, “to become competitive economically and to achieve sustainable growth, Russia needs to ‘shrink’. It must contract not its territory, but its economic geography.” The trade across the Urals was not all one way: in return for its resources, Siberia was sent criminals, prostitutes, dissidents and revolutionaries. In “The House of the Dead”, a history of Siberian exile, Daniel Beer notes that “the metaphors changed over time, but the basic conviction remained that Siberia was a receptacle for the empire’s own disorder.” This was meant to cleanse Russia, not change Siberia. But some exiles could not help but bring change—none more so than the Decembrists. Young men who had been greeted as liberators across Europe during the Napoleonic wars, they had returned home to Russia infused with the ideals of liberty, nationhood and republicanism. On December 26th 1825 they mounted an armed revolt in St Petersburg. It failed. Five were hanged; 121 were sent east. Instead of oblivion, they found hope. Nikolai Basargin, a 26-year-old Decembrist, wrote in his diaries, “The further we travelled into Siberia, the more fetching it seemed in my eyes. The common people seemed freer, more lively and more educated than our Russian peasants, especially the serfs.” The locals were, he thought, rather like Americans. “There is no doubt,” Basargin wrote, “that Siberia would stand its own in comparison to the American States, this young republic whose rapid growth in material and political significance is so striking both in terms of its attitude to dignity and to human rights”. The legacy of the Decembrists survived the fall of the Russian empire and the Bolshevik revolution. In the 1970s one Decembrist family home in Irkutsk became an atmospheric museum and a place of pilgrimage for the Soviet intelligentsia. In an act of dignity and defiance, a Siberian publishing house brought out a series of Decembrist memoirs. If you see that legacy in Mr Muratov’s snowflakes and stripes, too, you might not be wrong. When, in 1861, serfdom was abolished in the rest of Russia, millions of the newly free but landless flocked there, assisted by the Russian state. The Trans-Siberian railway, second only to St Petersburg itself as a tsarist imposition of modernity on the landscape, spread them between newly thriving cities and settlements in between. The elegant classical architecture of 19th-century Irkutsk and the delicate ornamentation of wooden Art Nouveau houses in Tomsk still survive among grey Soviet apartment blocks and eclectic post-Soviet monstrosities, testament to the tastes, money and energy that turned frontier forts into prosperous and cultured cities. Rich as it was in resources and talents, Siberia lacked a wide range of freedoms. It saw itself as a colony and did not like that status, especially when the word was preceded by the modifier “penal”. Siberian intellectuals, students and journalists fostered a new regionalism. They did not want independence. They wanted Siberia to live up to its potential as the best part of Russia—as what Russia might become. As Yadrintsev argued in “Siberia as a Colony”: “The views and horizons of Russian people widen along with the Russian border…Whatever the history of this land, it cannot be deprived of its future.” America was, once again, the model. On July 4th 1918, in the aftermath of the Bolshevik revolution, Siberia claimed its sovereignty. It could not hold it, and eventually fell to the Bolsheviks, many of whom had spent time imprisoned in the region. They went on to do unto others as had been done unto them on an industrial scale. Tsarist-era exile settlements were turned into slave-labour camps. Yet even as the country descended into Stalin’s great terror, Siberia retained its romantic allure; its sense of being a place of shelter. Osip Mandelstam, one of Russia’s most significant 20th century poets, who would soon perish in the Gulag, described this paradox in 1931. In Vladimir Nabokov’s translation: After Stalin’s death in 1953 new hope arose. Novosibirsk, about 800km west of Krasnoyarsk, was chosen as the site for a new, scientific town, or Akademgorodok, that would accelerate the Soviet Union into the communist future. It brought together, among others, nuclear physicists working on thermonuclear fusion and linguists considering how to communicate with aliens in the cosmic future Yuri Gagarin had opened up. Other futurisms were less welcome. The 1970s saw huge new industrial projects in the region carried out under the aegis of the communist youth league. One of Siberia’s earliest chroniclers had rejoiced that “the air above is cheerful”. Not once the smelters started. The air was poisoned and the rivers dammed, engulfing whole villages. People were enraged and the 19th-century notion of a separate identity resurfaced, notably in the work of the Siberian “village writers”. In 1987 Irkutsk, the city where Alexander Kolchak, the Imperial Army admiral recognised by many countries as Russia’s head of state, was executed in 1920, staged the first mass anti-government demonstration in the history of the Soviet Union. It was aimed at a barbaric plan to dump waste from a paper-processing plant on the shores of Lake Baikal into the river which supplied the city’s water. When the Soviet empire finally collapsed, Boris Yeltsin, Russia’s new president, promised the country’s regions “as much sovereignty as they could swallow.” Siberia was to get 10% of all the revenues raised from its natural resources. The region’s affinity for the wild West returned with a vengeance as oligarchs, local criminals and chancers tussled for dominance. Tomsk, home to a university that had served as an intellectual hub for regionalism in the 19th century, grew into one of Russia’s most politically vibrant cities, with a critical, independent television channel—TV2—and competitive politics. All this stacked up against Tomsk when President Vladimir Putin started to consolidate his power. Mikhail Khodorkovsky, the boss of Yukos, Siberia’s largest company, was imprisoned. So was the mayor of Tomsk, his fate a warning to uppity regional politicians. Yukos was dismembered. TV2 was taken off the air in 2014. In 2004, the year of Mr Khodorkovsky’s first trial, Artem Loskutov, an artist, saw a Soviet-style May Day procession in Novosibirsk in which workers marched under the portraits of their factory bosses and logos of their produce. A poster for a strip-club painted in the style of Great Patriotic War propaganda demanded “capitulation” from its clients and promised a “victorious” shot of vodka. “The whole thing was absurd,” Mr Loskutov recalls. Enthused and amused, he and his friends joined in, carrying posters with slogans such as “Something like this” and “Oh!”. Thus did Novosibirsk’s “Contemporary Art Terrorism” group come into being, deconstructing a demonstration until it was just, as they put it, a “monstration” instead. At first it was just playful. But as Russia descended deeper into authoritarianism—and with it, state intervention in art—the monstrations grew in size and in substance. “Don’t teach us how to live, or we shall teach you” read their main slogan in 2008. Two years later: “If everyone starts walking like this, what kind of anarchy will it be?!” Other cities started to copy Novosibirsk’s example. Mr Muratov began to paint his “flag”. Responding to the everyday surrealism of Putin’s Russia, Vasily Slonov, an ironic conceptualist from Krasnsoyarsk (whose heavy-metal crown, poking fun at Western pop culture, is pictured), inverted one of the slogans from Paris in 1968: “Be impossible, demand reality.” Before an exhibition in Moscow in 2018, he displayed a toy bear carrying the slogan in Red Square. The bear was subsequently detained by the police, and has not been heard from since. In a small, packed Novosibirsk bar ironically (of course) decked out as a Soviet-era pivnaya (beer hole), what strikes you about such artists and their intellectual partners in the resurgence of Siberian regionalism is their self-confidence. They do not debate whether Russia belongs in Europe or in Asia or whether it could ever become a “normal” country—the sort of questions fretted over in trendy Moscow cafés. As far as they are concerned, theirs is a normal country: one called Siberia which is populated by “spontaneous Eurasians”, people who listen to their own common sense rather than the agenda pushed by the Kremlin or Moscow liberals. When, after the invasion of 2014, Russia’s state propaganda whipped up patriotic hysteria under the slogan “Crimea is ours”, the monstrators responded with “Hell is ours”. When the Kremlin demanded the federalisation of Ukraine, the artists called a march for the federalisation of Siberia and “the creation of the Siberian republic within the Russian Federation”. Its slogan was “Stop feeding Moscow”. The Russian authorities banned the march and blocked the internet page that advertised it. Predictably, this generated a far greater resonance from the media than the march itself would probably have done: conceptual politics born from conceptual art, and all the more powerful for it. “All Siberian cities have different problems, but they have a common grievance against Moscow,” explains Mikhail Rozhansky, a historian and sociologist in Irkutsk. Yet while on paper Siberia is no different from any other Russian region, in reality it has retained some autonomy. And the harder the Kremlin tries to unify the country, the stronger the sense of separateness becomes. It is perhaps simply a function of size. In a land this large, people rely on themselves and each other; they do not have high expectations of any politician and reject authority as a matter of principle. This gives them the country’s strongest streak of Russia’s most distinctive contribution to political discourse: anarchy. In 1898 Prince Peter Kropotkin, the father of anarcho-communism, wrote that in Siberia he “understood that the administrative machine [of the state] can do no good for people…In Siberia I lost any faith in state discipline and was ready to become an anarchist”. In the last days of the Soviet Union Grazhdanskaya Oborona (Civil Defence), an iconic punk band from the Siberian city of Omsk, inspired their fans by singing: “Kill the state within yourself” and “Our truth, our faith, our deed is anarchy”. Protest is currently easier in Siberia than in the rest of Russia, and politics freer, too. For the most part this liberty is exercised only locally. But in 2019 Alexander Gabyshev took it on himself to expand it in a very Siberian way. Though some indigenous Siberians converted to Christianity after the Russians arrived, and some practice Buddhism, some still follow Shamanism. Mr Gabyshev styles himself a shaman warrior. In the spring he set off from his native Yakutia dragging a cart, a dozen followers in his wake. His destination was Moscow, “the heart of evil”; his goal was to exorcise the dark forces embodied by Mr Putin by lighting a fire in Red Square and performing a ritual with a tambourine. As he went along, his following grew, both on the road and online. “From now on Putin is not a law to you. Live freely. That is the law,” he preached—part Kropotkin, part Aleister Crowley, an occultist. Then one night a SWAT team descended on his camp and packed the shaman back on a plane to Yakutia. There he was briefly incarcerated in a psychiatric ward before being ordered not to leave Yakutia again. Amnesty International declared him a prisoner of conscience. Mr Gabyshev compares himself to a caterpillar which “knows that what will come out of this cocoon will be faster, stronger and wiser.” The idea of a shaman liberating Russia has a surrealism all of its own. But he is not the only one to believe that a cleansing can come from the east to the west. In 2013 Vladislav Inozemtsev, a liberal economist, and Valery Zubov, a former governor of the Krasnoyarsk region, wrote a response to “The Siberian Curse” called “The Siberian Blessing”. They argue that, “in a vast and over-centralised country such as Russia, [modernisation] cannot come from the centre, because the centre is the main beneficiary of the rent-seeking system.” Siberia—“the awakening colony that frees itself”—is not an eastern province of Russia. Rather Moscow is a city west of Siberia in dire need of reform and anarchy, cheerful skies and irony, and perhaps a touch of shamanism, too. As Sergei Kovalevksy, the curator of the museum in Krasnoyarsk, puts it, “In Siberia anything is possible.” A similar thought occurred to Chekhov when he stopped in Krasnoyarsk. “On the Volga a man started with valour and ended with a moan, which is called a song. On the Yenisei, life started with a moan and will end with valour of a kind we can’t even dream of. This is what I thought standing on the bank of the wide Yenisei: what a full, clever and brave life will light these banks with time!” Most of the Krasnoyarsk that Chekhov would have seen in the 1890s is long gone. But something of that thought remains, projected every night onto a building that was once Lenin’s Museum.■