FOR YEARS, technologists have gushed about the promise of the “Internet of Things” (IOT). With ubiquitous sensors and universal connectivity, punters have been told, the IOT will transform ordinary workshops into smart factories. Passengers will enjoy safe travel in autonomous cars and cargoes will be tracked seamlessly across borders. Consumers will enjoy blazing-fast connections on mobile devices that allow whole films to be downloaded in an instant. This heady vision was promoted so heavily for so long by tech vendors that it began to seem like a chimera. It is not. The two essential technologies speeding the IOT’s arrival, inexpensive sensors and super-fast networking kit, are advancing fast. Gartner, a research group, predicts that the global number of devices embedded with sensors will leap from 8.4bn in 2017 to 20.4bn in 2020.  The second enabler is 5G, a telecoms-networking technology superior to today’s 4G mobile networks. Hans Vestberg, chief executive of Verizon, an American telecoms giant, has restructured his entire firm around 5G’s potential, arguing that it will bring many benefits beyond blazing-fast speed. For example, an IOT network based on 5G connections would allow a million devices to be clustered within a square kilometre, as they might be on a dense factory floor or at a crowded sports arena—far more than the 60,000 or so possible with 4G. Alas, the once-bright prospects for a speedy global roll-out are turning into a tale of the good, the bad and the ugly. The good news is that several big markets will see 5G networks deployed at scale in 2020. Verizon expects three-quarters of the phones it launches in 2020 in America to be 5G-capable, and AT&T, a rival firm, expects to offer nationwide coverage by mid-year. Huawei, China’s telecoms-equipment giant, has spent $46bn developing 5G kit, and expects to deploy 1.5m base stations across hundreds of Chinese cities by the end of 2020. Europe has been held back by market fragmentation, but the European Commission is pushing to have an EU-wide commercial roll-out of 5G by the end of 2020. The bad news is that the usefulness of all this will be limited at first. Unless consumers spend a fortune on the latest 5G handsets, they will not be able to enjoy super-fast downloads. Most companies will not have sensors embedded in all of their factory machinery for a few years yet, though vendors like Siemens and GE will be keen to help them set up such “industrial internets”. There are also barriers to the use of IOT devices in some industries (privacy concerns in health care, for example) that require policy reforms. As the various hurdles are overcome over the next few years, reckons Michael Chui of the McKinsey Global Institute, a think-tank, IOT technologies will create between $3.9trn and $11.1trn in economic value globally by 2025. The ugly aspect of the 5G story involves geopolitics. A decision to ban Huawei from America’s telecoms networks and to deny it access to vital intellectual property from American suppliers has dealt a severe blow to the market leader. President Donald Trump has cited security concerns. Huawei points out that no evidence of wrongdoing has ever been presented. America has also been strong-arming its allies around the world to reject Chinese kit. Some, like Australia, have done so. Others, like Britain, may restrict Huawei to peripheral parts of their networks. In countries where Huawei is banned, telecoms operators must rely on more expensive, non-Chinese 5G kit made by Finland’s Nokia, Sweden’s Ericsson or South Korea’s Samsung. Sensing opportunity, Ericsson plans to open a new manufacturing plant in Texas in 2020 to make 5G equipment that is palatable to the White House. Still, vast swathes of the globe, from Russia to Malaysia to Peru, will remain open to Huawei in 2020. This is not only because they are in China’s geopolitical orbit, though this is true for many Asian and African countries. Huawei’s 5G equipment is also more advanced: Chinese firms represent over a third of global patent applications for 5G-related technologies, with Huawei alone representing 15% of the world total. And Huawei’s equipment is less expensive than rivals’ kit. The result is likely to be a bifurcated IOT, dividing the world between countries willing to use Chinese telecoms gear and those that share America’s concerns over security. Part of the 5G dream was that of a unified global standard for networking. Once that is fractured, the resultant divide poses huge headaches. Multinational firms with operations in Shenzhen and Silicon Valley cannot use the same IOT systems in both. Global developers of IOT devices relying on seamless 5G, such as new virtual- and augmented-reality applications, may be handicapped by interoperability issues among markets. Frank Appel, chairman of Deutche Post DHL, a giant logistics and package-delivery firm, warns that if information cannot be exchanged easily between different networks, “we have to go back to paperwork and print and input into the system…I don’t know how we will manage.” Verizon’s Mr Vestberg observes that 5G would then be a step back to 1G and 2G, which used network standards that did not allow seamless global connectivity. Vincent Peng, a board member at Huawei, warns that this could result in a disastrous “digital Berlin Wall”. Unless a political settlement is soon reached between China and America on 5G, 2020 will be remembered for the arrival of the Splinternet of Things. This article appears in “The World in 2020”, our annual edition that looks at the year ahead. See more at worldin.economist.com.