FootballArmchair football fans have much to celebrate on Boxing Day with an unprecedented nine live Premier League games on offer. Not everyone will be rejoicing. Five managers from England’s top league have already been sacked this season, and only a handful will feel confident of lasting until May. But how important is the manager to the success of a team? In January we crunched the numbers for five European leagues and found that luck and player quality has a greater impact than the gaffer’s tactical wizardry. Some managers do outperform though: Jürgen Klopp, who turned mid-table Borussia Dortmund into two-time German champions, won the UEFA Champions League with Liverpool in June. They were one of six English teams in ClubElo’s top-ten ranking of European clubs this year. We charted how English clubs re-conquered European football in May.   TV and filmThis has been a bumper—and bumpy—year for television. “Chernobyl”, HBO’s dramatisation of an explosion at a nuclear reactor in Soviet Ukraine in 1986, quickly became the highest-rated TV show on IMDb, a film- and television-rating site. We also charted the descent of “Game of Thrones”, the final season of which aired to widespread disdain in April. On the big screen, “Green Book”, the winner of this year’s Best Picture Oscar, was met with similar disparagement. In March we looked at how often every previous Best Picture winner and nominee was referenced by subsequent films and TV shows and found that Oscar voters have become far less adept at picking films that go on to have a lasting cultural influence.  AlcoholThe alcohol industry is under pressure from governments to limit the harm caused by its products. In Britain many producers and retailers have signed a “responsibility deal” and promised to “help people to drink within guidelines”. They hope to keep the profits pouring in by encouraging the public to “drink less, but drink better”, meaning fewer, fancier tipples. Our analysis of beer ratings suggests that this is easier said than done: pricey craft ales get higher ratings but cheaper lagers are more widely consumed. Worse still, we found that people would need to pay 22-98% more per drink to make up for the revenue lost to such moderation. In the ideal scenario, people would buy expensive booze but never drink it. According to our wine-price index, that might not be such a bad idea: since 2003, you would have made more money investing in Burgundy rather than in the S&P 500. Life satisfactionIs making money the best route to happiness? In 1974 Richard Easterlin, an economist, discovered that average life-satisfaction in America had stagnated between 1946 and 1970 even as GDP per person had grown by 65% over the same period. Yet pollsters have found a strong correlation between happiness and higher GDP. We looked at Gallup’s World Happiness Report in March to see how the “Easterlin paradox” was holding up. And in August we found an alternative explanation: the key to happiness might be a walk in the park. Just the thing after an over-indulgent Christmas. Sources: Electronic Arts; Transfermarkt; IMDb; Untappd; Brewers Association; World Happiness Report, by John Helliwell, Richard Layard & Jeffrey Sachs (eds), UN, 2019; World Bank