IT TOOK TERRENCE MALICK 30 years to become one of the most revered American arthouse film-makers, and only eight to become a punchline. After reaching the apex of his career with “The Tree Of Life” (2011), winner of the Palme d’Or and considered by many critics one of the finest movies of this decade, Mr Malick veered into a flighty, experimental phase. He shot a loose trilogy—“To The Wonder” (2012), “Knight Of Cups” (2015) and “Song To Song” (2017)—across overlapping schedules, with no script, amassing hundreds of hours of footage. Those films depicted ponderous soul quests, held together with clunky voiceovers; they alienated all but his most diehard fans. In a rare public appearance in 2016 Mr Malick confessed that the relative cheapness of digital technology had made him indulgent on these projects. Now he is back with “A Hidden Life”, a biopic of Franz Jägerstätter, an Austrian farmer who refused to pledge an oath of loyalty to Hitler during the second world war. (The title comes from George Eliot’s “Middlemarch”, praising “the number who lived faithfully a hidden life, and rest in unvisited tombs”.) The film’s historical weight, straightforward narrative and modern-day resonance give the director a courage of conviction absent from his last few efforts. Mr Malick uses a familiar pastoral setting to expand on a key theme of his work: what it means to live a good, moral and harmonious life in a time of conflict.  That same question underpinned his previous second-world-war movie, “The Thin Red Line” (1998), which followed an American soldier who had abandoned the battlefield to live among the Melanesian natives of Guadalcanal—a land soon to be brutalised by his fellow soldiers in the name of peace. In a mirror image of that film, “A Hidden Life” begins with Franz (August Diehl) immersed in the simple pleasures of nature, tending his farm in the Radegund hillside of Upper Austria while he courts Franziska (Valerie Pachner). These early scenes offer the typical Malickian fare: rolling through fields, chasing chickens and embracing a lover with wide smiles and carefree abandon. Reality, in the form of military conscription, interrupts this paradise. Though Franz is willing to protect the Austrian Republic, he balks at the requirement of all enlisted men to swear allegiance to the Führer. This occasions a crisis of faith, because the farmer’s entire village has embraced Nazi rule; neighbours threaten his family for insufficient loyalty, and not even the local priest is able to provide absolute assurance that this devout Catholic has made the noble and Christian choice. Franz is thrown into prison and brought before a tribunal. He is urged to sign the paper to save his life, even if his true allegiances lie elsewhere, and time and again he refuses. “A Hidden Life” breaks with most films about the lone dissenters of history in that it never so much as hints that the population will eventually come around to its hero’s conclusion. Franz’s rejection of the oath is not framed as the start of a rolling wave of right-thinking opposition that will spin the world back on its moral axis. He comes to his decision in total isolation. And he is punished for it, executed in 1943 at the age of 36 (as he was in real life). As the road to Franz’s death becomes ever more certain, he makes his peace with God, ever gazing upwards and remembering those times in the fields with Franziska when he felt at his fullest. The film shows Franz finding the divine within himself, when he cannot find it in his fellow man. Here Mr Malick has rediscovered his strengths as a film-maker. Rather than reject the problems of humankind—as he is often accused of doing when he pans the camera away from his characters to focus on nature instead—the director explores the power of human decency in a world of evil. “A Hidden Life” is released in America on December 13th and in Britain on January 17th 2020