The Honjin Murders. By Seishi Yokomizo. Translated by Louise Heal Kawai.Pushkin Vertigo; 192 pages; $14.95 and £8.99. SEISHI YOKOMIZO was one of Japan’s most popular and prolific mystery writers. His first novel appeared in 1935, but it was a tale he published 11 years later that made his reputation. “The Honjin Murders” introduced Kosuke Kindaichi, an amateur sleuth, and launched a bestselling series of 77 titles, many of which were adapted for stage or television. Hailed as a classic of its genre in Japan, it has only now been translated into English (by Louise Heal Kawai).  The setting is the grand residence of the wealthy and illustrious Ichiyanagi family. It is November 1937 and in two days Kenzo Ichiyanagi, the eldest son and heir, will marry Katsuko Kubo. Kenzo’s family are united in their objection to his choice of bride: Katsuko may have her own fortune and career, but as the daughter of a tenant farmer, her lineage is wrong. The ceremony goes ahead, but that night the newly married couple are found stabbed to death, “soaked in the crimson of their own blood”. The police are stumped: the room is sealed; a samurai sword stands upright in the snow outside; footprints lead in but not out. Eventually Kindaichi is summoned to solve the puzzle—but not before tragedy strikes again. An aficionado of Western detective novels, Yokomizo offers a fresh spin on familiar ingredients. The locked-room mystery—not just a whodunnit but a how-done-it—pays homage to past masters such as John Dickson Carr and Gaston Leroux. The rural setting and denouement bring to mind Agatha Christie. But the detective at its centre is a singular creation: scruffy, with “bird’s-nest hair”, yet possessing brilliant powers of observation, deduction and insight into human behaviour. The killer’s meticulous planning and the author’s fiendish plot fulfil one of Raymond Chandler’s “ten commandments” for the detective novel: “It must baffle a reasonably intelligent reader.” Those readers will delight in the blind turns, red herrings and dubious alibis, as they sift the evidence with Kindaichi. Who was the masked, three-fingered man seen in the vicinity? What was a sickle doing in a nearby camphor tree? And is there any truth to the rumour of a family curse? Yokomizo (who died in 1981) saves his biggest surprise for the end. If the whole series is as ingenious and compelling, this translation should be the first of many. ■