“IT IS A small hammer but I think it can achieve great things,” proclaimed Laurent Fabius on the morning of December 12th 2015. Moments before, France’s then foreign minister had gavelled in the Paris agreement on climate change. In some ways it was a remarkable moment, sealing the first international agreement on climate change since the Kyoto protocol of 1997 and the first ever to include commitments by both rich and developing countries alike. But in other ways, it was a bit of a let-down. Although the text included a collective pledge to limit global warming to 1.5º-2ºC above pre-industrial temperatures, that ambition was not matched by the sum of national promises to cut emissions. The world as a whole committed itself to tackling climate change, but in practice none of the governments seemed willing to do enough to make that promise a reality.  Aware of this contradiction, the architects of the Paris agreement built in a mechanism to encourage governments to declare new national climate goals (known as “nationally determined contributions” to the agreement, or NDCs. Each new NDC must be greater than the previous one. The first updates are due in 2020 at the 26th UN climate talks (COP26), which will take place in November in Glasgow. The Climate Action Summit held in New York in 2019 was meant to get this process moving. So far 81 countries, mostly small emitters in Africa and Latin America, have formally communicated their intentions to update their NDCs in 2020. Collectively they account for just 18.1% of global emissions. Among the big emitters, Australia, Brazil, Canada and Japan have remained silent on their intentions. Their contributions are key to the success or failure of any global climate pact. Donald Tusk, president of the European Council, said in New York that the EU would submit an ambitious long-term strategy in 2020. But earlier efforts to adopt a target of net-zero emissions by 2050 were blocked by the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary and Poland. Commitment from China, the source of around 27% of global emissions in 2017, is also crucial. It was reluctant to make any promises unless America moved first. Its position softened during Barack Obama’s presidency. Donald Trump’s administration has clearly removed any peer pressure on climate matters, but Xi Jinping’s government is still committed to the Paris process, judging by a joint statement published with France in June 2019. Some analysts believe China may wait to see whether the American election delivers four more years of Mr Trump, or a Democratic administration with strong environmental policies. Mr Trump has promised to take America out of the Paris agreement. The earliest he could do that is November 2020, but a newly elected Democratic administration would probably rejoin it right away. In the background of all the manoeuvring is a scientific assessment that global emissions should peak in 2020 to have the best chance of meeting the 1.5ºc target. It would take a miracle for this to happen: emissions are rising by roughly 1.5% per year. Which means they will have to fall faster still in future. This article appears in “The World in 2020”, our annual edition that looks at the year ahead. See more at worldin.economist.com.