“Everything is Alive” In each episode of this podcast, an inanimate object (voiced by an actor) tells its life story. Existential angst abounds, dreams are shared and heartbreaks are revealed. Conor, a portrait of President William Howard Taft, tries to bury his feelings of frustration that everyone visiting the National Portrait Gallery in Washington is only interested in seeing the Obama portraits (“I’m not a bad painting, but I’m not a great one”). Emily, a pregnancy test, knows she can only be positive or negative, but still feels uncertain about her life inside a box with only an instruction manual for company. Other interviewees include a bath towel named Shannon, a satellite named Charu and a 40-year-old copy of the Canberra Times named Jennifer. Witty, charming and imaginative, “Everything is Alive” creates a compelling world where the stuff that surrounds listeners has feelings, just like they do.  “Heavyweight” Jonathan Goldstein helps people with unsolved mysteries—of the interpersonal kind. In one episode, two sisters, who had 16 babysitters over the course of their childhood, enlist him to find out exactly why Leticia, their favourite, left them 20 years ago. In another, he reconnects a woman with her father, who disappeared without an explanation. In a particularly moving (and amusing) episode, he helps a group of middle-aged men reunite to reminisce about a 240-mile bicycle trip they took across two states—completely unsupervised—at the age of ten. Brilliantly produced, “Heavyweight” is imbued with humour, tenacity and grace. It is a touching, often tear-jerking reflection on how it is often unspoken things that burden people’s lives most heavily. “How’s Work?” In “How’s Work?” Esther Perel steps out of the bedroom and into the workplace. The Belgian-born psychotherapist became a popular guru on sex and relationships after a TED talk, “Rethinking Fidelity”, was viewed 9.7m times on YouTube and “Mating in Captivity” (2006), her first book, became an international bestseller. Her previous foray into podcasting was an enlightening fly-on-the-wall show in which audiences could tune into the one-off therapy sessions she held with couples. In this podcast, Ms Perel deploys the same model, but instead she counsels pairs in the workplace. Her interlocutors are varied: a fighter-jet pilot team who co-founded a business and now want to part ways; sex workers grappling with how they’ll make their next step in their professional careers; a mother-and-son team who need to learn to establish boundaries. “All the relational habits you built in life don’t immediately disappear the moment you walk into the office,” Ms Perel says. “Have You Heard George’s Podcast” Blurring the line between fiction, music, social commentary, poetry and personal reflection, “Have You Heard George’s Podcast” tells stories that are all too often ignored. Focusing on the city of London, the first season of George Mpanga’s experimental and enthralling show tackled the riots of 2011, the Grenfell Tower fire in 2017 (which killed 72 residents of a 24-storey council-housing block in a wealthy neighbourhood), the role music plays in the lives of disadvantaged young people and the modern Libyan slave trade. It blends the personal and the political in a way that defies simple explanation, and the show won a slew of accolades at the British podcast awards this year. The second series, released in November, is just as outstanding. “Dolly Parton’s America” For two years Jad Abumrad, the co-host of “Radiolab”, a critically-acclaimed science podcast, followed Dolly Parton around the world. The result is a delightfully multi-layered nine-part series about her life, her music and her legacy. It tells the listener as much about America as it does about the platinum-blonde songstress who grew up in a one-room cabin in the Great Smokey Mountains of east Tennessee and went on to become one of the country’s most beloved musicians. “In this intensely divided moment, one of the few things everyone still seems to agree on is Dolly Parton—but why?” Mr Abumrad asks. He uncovers truths behind the legend, and delivers fascinating insights into the political and psychological landscape of America itself. “Last Days of August” In 2017 August Ames, a 23-year-old adult film star, killed herself in a park in the Conejo Valley, California. That day she had been publically condemned on social media for a tweet that some considered homophobic. In this haunting podcast, Jon Ronson, a journalist and author of “The Psychopath Test” and “So You’ve Been Publicly Shamed”, begins by investigating the story of how cyberbullying led to Ames’s demise. In the course of this compassionately handled analysis, Mr Jonson, and Lina Misitzis, his producer, also uncover another deeply disturbing story: the tragic failure of the porn industry to protect the psychological lives of its workers.