JOSEPH MUSCAT, the prime minister of Malta, announced on December 1st his intention to resign—but not until next month, and maybe later than that. He was speaking against the background of a raging political and financial scandal, the most serious in the post-independence history of the European Union’s smallest member state. A day earlier, Malta’s richest man, Yorgen Fenech, was charged with complicity in the murder in 2017 of an investigative journalist who had accused a company he owned of shadowy dealings with Mr Muscat’s chief of staff and with one of his ministers. All three men deny wrongdoing. The former chief of staff, Keith Schembri, has resigned. He was arrested the following day, but released from police custody two days later. The minister, Konrad Mizzi, has also stepped down.  Yet Mr Muscat did not link his own decision to resign to these sensational developments, nor to his having retained both men in his team despite evidence to show they had secretly founded offshore companies that were allegedly due to receive payments from another offshore entity controlled by Mr Fenech (which they also deny). On the contrary, the prime minister’s tone was defiant. “Our institutions are strong and they function,” he declared. “Shame on anyone who ridicules them, as he or she is ridiculing our country.” Crucially, moreover, Mr Muscat failed to name a date for his departure. He said his party would start choosing a new leader on January 12th. But he would step down as prime minister “in the days after”. The vagueness of that undertaking was immediately criticised by the relatives of the dead journalist, Daphne Caruana Galizia, by opposition politicians and others. A Nationalist Party MEP, Roberta Metsola, wrote: “[Mr Muscat] wants to plunge Malta into six more weeks of crisis as he clings on by his fingernails to try and save himself and his friends.” In another tweet she asked: “How many documents can one shred in 42 days?” The Chamber of Advocates, which represents Malta’s lawyers, said that the prime minister’s position was untenable and that conflicts of interest posed a “clear and present danger” to the investigation and subsequent judicial process. Caruana Galizia, a dogged investigator of suspected corruption, died when a bomb planted in her car was detonated as she drove away from her home on the main island. Three men have already been charged with her murder, though no one imagines they acted without being ordered by someone. A fourth man was arrested on suspicion of being the link between the killers and those who commissioned her assassination. He has since been granted a pardon and has reportedly been co-operating with the investigation. Many questions remain to be answered in this murky affair. Some go beyond responsibility for Caruana Galizia’s death. A delegation from the European Parliament arrives in Malta on December 3rd on a two-day mission to evaluate the functioning of the rule of law in the archipelago state. They will have their work cut out for them. A tiny country with a population of just 440,000, Malta thrives on service industries, including some like gaming and offshore finance that act as a magnet for shady operators. And in a little archipelago where links of kinship and friendship produce a dense web of obligations, it is almost impossible for investigations to proceed without conflicts of interest arising. Malta also suffers from having a constitutional and administrative set-up, inherited from its past as a British colony, that gives immense power to the executive yet lacks many of the checks and balances that are normal in other democratic societies. Mr Muscat plans to remain at the apex of that structure for at least the next six weeks, during which crucial decisions will be taken on who was ultimately responsible for Daphne Caruana Galizia’s death. Many Maltese reckon that that cannot possibly be right.