THESE ARE thin times for European banks. For many, decent profitability has long been a struggle. Slow growth and negative interest rates—legacies of the global financial crisis and its aftermath in the euro zone—have squeezed the lending revenues that are banking’s lifeblood. Costs remain stubbornly high: according to the European Banking Authority, a regulator, they soak up more than three-fifths of income at 78% of European banks. Only one in eight, says the EBA, enjoys a return on equity of more than 10%, a rough gauge of what shareholders, trusting to hope more than experience, expect European banks to earn. Another measure of how meagre times are is that even banks with decent stories to tell struggle to impress financial markets. Take UniCredit, Italy’s biggest bank. Arguably, UniCredit is the closest thing Europe has to a pan-continental bank, with commercial-banking businesses stretching from Germany through Austria and central and eastern Europe as far as Turkey. On December 3rd it laid out its plans for the next four years.  Under Jean-Pierre Mustier (pictured), the Frenchman who has been its boss since July 2016, UniCredit has bolstered its balance-sheet with more than €20bn ($22bn) in capital, reduced non-performing loans by €29bn, shed jobs and closed branches (of which Italy, notoriously, has far too many). Yet its return on tangible equity this year will be just 9% or so. The stockmarket values its shares at just half of net book value. So, the plan is to keep squeezing costs and strengthening the balance-sheet—and to hand more money to shareholders. Although UniCredit promises to “grow and strengthen” its SME business especially, total revenues are expected to rise by just 0.8% a year between 2018 and 2023, and by only 0.5% in Italy, Germany and Austria. But another 8,000 jobs will go, more than 9% of the total, as well as another 500 branches, more than one in ten. And by 2023 the bank will pay out half of its net profit to shareholders, up from 20% last year. Of the €8bn it intends to hand out in all, one-quarter will come from share buybacks. For a European bank, making enough money to promise to repurchase shares is a rarity. American shareholders, by contrast, have come to expect such largesse. Yet UniCredit’s buyback programme is as much a measure of European banking’s weakness as of the Italian lender’s health. Even after four more years of grind, it expects a return on tangible equity of only 8%-odd in 2023. Rather than reinvest, better to return the money. In particular, as Mr Mustier made clear, UniCredit has no appetite for buying other banks. Over the past year and more, he was reported to be toying with the sort of big, cross-border merger that is needed to build European banks of truly continental scale. UniCredit has taken the plunge before: in 2005 it bought HypoVereinsbank, one of Germany’s biggest lenders. Recent gossip has linked it with Commerzbank, another German bank, and France’s Société Générale, where Mr Mustier once ran the investment bank. (Commerzbank held abortive merger talks with Deutsche Bank, its bigger, enfeebled Frankfurt neighbour, earlier this year.) The obstacles to such deals are high. As Mr Mustier himself has complained, national regulations prevent, say, German households’ deposits being used to finance loans to Italian businesses. Cross-border differences in everything from housing markets to language limit the potential cost savings from merging. As long as European banks’ profits remain measly, few will want to buy them. Perhaps not even other European banks.