PRESIDENT DONALD TRUMP has spent years playing the role of a China hawk. Events in 2020—notably around China’s periphery, in border regions and contested territories where Beijing struggles to impose its autocratic will—could push him towards truly hawkish policies that challenge China on political and ideological grounds. It might seem odd to call Mr Trump soft on China in any way. He ran for office accusing China of manipulating its currency to “rape” America’s economy. As president he unleashed a tariff war. He has allowed genuinely hawkish aides and officials to impose sanctions on Chinese companies deemed a threat to national security, notably the technology giant Huawei; to hunt for Chinese spies and agents of influence; and to upgrade military ties with Taiwan, the democratic island of 24m people that China claims as a province.  Yet by instinct Mr Trump is not a conventional hawk, if hawkishness is defined as objecting to the principles that guide China’s modern rise, from its authoritarian political system to its embrace of state capitalism, in which the government’s deep pockets and legal powers are used to create local champions while bullying or excluding foreign competitors. Indeed, Mr Trump says that he does not blame China for trade cheating, calling its leaders smart. That opens a gap between the president and his officials, who push lists of structural changes that China must make, starting with further opening of its markets to foreign firms. In contrast, Mr Trump brags that his tariffs are inducing American businesses to leave China, as if market access for multinationals is barely a priority at all. Mr Trump has pursued a narrower agenda: namely, reducing the trade deficit by pushing China to buy American goods, above all from farm states important to his re-election in November. But in an American election year, when there will be no political downside to talking tough on China, events could push Mr Trump into cold-war-style confrontations that he has avoided until now. Start with Hong Kong, locked in a crisis that could have been tailor-made to appeal to American public opinion. It pits pro-demo­cracy protesters, many of them young, English-speaking graduates of a liberal education, against baton-wielding security forces. Democrats will jump on any repetition of the ambivalence that Mr Trump showed in 2019, when he dismissed Hong Kong’s demonstrations as “riots” that were for Beijing to deal with. In the event of real horrors in Hong Kong, such as the deployment of mainland troops to crack skulls and shed blood, prominent Republicans in Congress will join Democrats in demanding sanctions on Chinese officials and a review of trade privileges extended to the former British colony. In China’s far west, meanwhile, the brutal, remorseless repression of Uighurs and other Muslim minorities in Xinjiang will fuel election-year debates about human rights, and questions about why Mr Trump rarely speaks about them, leaving that to his underlings. A succession crisis in Tibet could return that tragic, isolated region to the headlines. The exiled Tibetan spiritual leader, the Dalai Lama, will turn 85 in 2020. Moving offshore, Mr Trump’s (weak) commitment to upholding the security of America’s democratic allies could be tested by trouble in Taiwan, which holds presidential and legislative elections in January 2020. The Chinese government loathes the sitting president, Tsai Ing-wen, because she opposes calls for Taiwan to become part of the Chinese motherland and points to Hong Kong as a reason to distrust Beijing’s promises of autonomy under the slogan “one country, two systems”. China has seethed as hawks working for Mr Trump have sought to deepen and enhance America’s relations with Taiwan. If Ms Tsai wins re-election, renewed bullying by China may demand an American response. Chinese naval provocations in the South China Sea (see next story), if ignored by Mr Trump, could also embolden critics of an American president who—time and again—has scorned the idea that his country is an indispensable guardian of a liberal, rules-based order. All in all, China’s periphery will be a source of unpredictable risks and threats. Those dangers must be added to the trade confrontation at the core of the America-China relationship. Critics will already be watching for signs of Mr Trump striking a shabby trade deal, in which China buys soyabeans from Iowa but dodges economic reforms. In 2020 Mr Trump may rue proclaiming himself “the chosen one” who can bring China to heel. This article appears in “The World in 2020”, our annual edition that looks at the year ahead. See more at worldin.economist.com.