A BURST OF voting in Latin America saw 15 presidential elections in the two years to November 2019. In 2020 a quieter period looms, Venezuela always excepted. The elections brought the victory of populists of varying kinds in Argentina, Brazil and Mexico, the region’s three biggest economies. Elsewhere, many of the new governments are weak. The task facing them is daunting: to assuage citizen discontent over mediocre economic growth, creaking public services and infrastructure, and a pervasive fear of violent crime. The region’s overarching problem will remain Venezuela. There is a chance that 2020 will see a negotiated return to democracy in which Nicolás Maduro, an illegitimately elected dictator, steps down and yields to a free and fair presidential election. But it is more likely that Mr Maduro, who has the backing of the armed forces and the support of Cuba and Russia, clings on, presiding over a country that descends further into penury and feral violence. In this case, more migrants will stream out of Venezuela. By the end of 2020, the total of those who have left since 2014 could rise to 7m-8m. Mr Maduro preserves the outward forms of democracy: whatever happens, he will hold the legislative election that is due in 2020. But unless there is a deal, it will be a sham affair, in which he seizes control of the parliament from a weakened opposition, which won a large majority in the last free election held in Venezuela in December 2015.  Colombia will face severe strain in 2020. It is being subverted passively and actively by Mr Maduro. Most of the migrants will head there. Venezuela harbours and sponsors Colombian guerrillas, who engage in drug-trafficking, illegal gold-mining and other criminal activities. Border skirmishes are likely—a full-fledged war is not impossible. Colombia’s president, Iván Duque, who lacks a majority in congress, will struggle unless adversity brings greater unity. Most of the 10,500 former FARC guerrillas who disarmed under an accord in 2016 will stick to that; to signal its commitment to peace the FARC political party will change its name. Latin Americans will hope in 2020 for release from a long slump that has seen average income per person in the region as a whole fall since 2013. Year after year since then, forecasters have had to slash their initial predictions of recovery. The IMF recently downgraded its estimate of growth for the region in 2020 to 1.8%. The hope of meeting it lies with Brazil. Jair Bolsonaro’s government will remain a politically dysfunctional affair, but its plans for tax reform, privatisation and private infrastructure investment may prod the economy into life. Municipal elections in October will offer an opportunity for the opposition to Mr Bolsonaro, both in the centre and on the left, to reorganise. Mexico has a strong president in Andrés Manuel López Obrador, but one who inspires little confidence among private business. The country faces slow economic decline. That will gradually take a toll on the president’s popularity ahead of a mid-term legislative election in July 2021 which is crucial to his hopes of constitutional change. He may try to engineer a short-term boost by breaking his pledge of fiscal discipline. This article appears in “The World in 2020”, our annual edition that looks at the year ahead. See more at worldin.economist.com.