THERE USED to be an iron rule for any American boss tempted to talk about politics: don’t. Recently, this rule has been discarded as chief executives have been drawn into taking stands on inequality, the culture wars and climate. So far they have had an easy ride: it is more fun to outline your vision for humanity than for increasing EBITDA margins. But in 2020 this new breed of activist CEOs will face three problems that politicians know well: the charge of hypocrisy, the risk of a recession and destabilising ideological shifts. Corporate America’s drift away from political neutrality and inactivity began after the financial crisis in 2008-09. Banks gave displays of contrition. A new generation of woke consumers and workers grew up during the crisis. Some were preoccupied by cultural injustices; others attacked capitalism, too. Climate change became an urgent problem and economic nationalism meant firms had to demonstrate their patriotism.  Bosses have responded to these signals. Jamie Dimon, of JPMorgan Chase, pens 50-page letters, ostensibly to its shareholders: the latest touches on education, and military procurement and demands “CEOs: your country needs you!” Silicon Valley chiefs humour a minority of radicalised employees. Bosses like to claim their firms are leading the fight against carbon emissions. In 2017 bosses joined flag-waving summits in the White House. And over 180 CEOs have signed a declaration by the Business Roundtable that their objective is not just to serve shareholders, but customers and workers, too. Business folk are motivated by idealism, vanity and calculated self-interest. But it also helps that, so far, CEO activism has been cost-free. Like some politicians, some bosses gladly take credit for things they do not control. Most of the CEOs who pledge to fight climate change do not run firms that are responsible for it. Take the biggest 200 Western firms that disclose emission figures. Of these, the top 20 are responsible for 70% of all emissions: the other 180 don’t matter much. And like some politicians, some CEOs make promises they don’t keep. Despite the Roundtable’s concern for workers, executive pay is rising and there is no sign of a rethink on how the spoils are split between labour and shareholders. Profits for the S&P 500 index are forecast to rise by 8% in 2020. By then the three downsides of CEO activism will have become more apparent. First, the accusations of hypocrisy: it is not hard to find. Nike, which has pushed virtuous branding, has been embroiled in a doping scandal. BlackRock, a fund manager that pushes other firms to invest more, spent over 100% of its own cashflow on buybacks in the past 12 months. Visa signed the Roundtable letter championing customers, but is part of a payments oligopoly. If the inconsistency between bosses’ words and actions becomes too glaring, reputations can suffer, as Mark Zuckerberg of Facebook knows. Second, if there is a recession, CEO activists will struggle to reconcile the interests of employees and their fiduciary duty to shareholders. In the past two downturns American firms cut their wage bill by 6%; if they had not, profits would have been 24% lower. This flexibility is a hallmark of American capitalism. The conflict between business logic and political posturing is already evident at firms facing technological disruption. Consider Mary Barra of General Motors, a prominent Roundtable signatory. In September 2019 she faced a strike by 46,000 workers who complained of unfair pay and factory closures as she tries to shift GM to electric vehicles. And third, as any member of Congress will tell you, the ideological ground can shift quickly. CEOs hope that by adopting social and political causes they will defuse more radical sentiments. Dream on. The presidential campaign in 2020 will feature lots of criticism of big business, some of it legitimate. Democrats’ proposals include workers on boards, beating up health-care firms and tackling monopolies, most obviously in big tech. No such thing as a free declarationBy the end of 2020 the leaders of America Inc will realise that political posturing is no free lunch. Many will worry that it is a gimmick that elicits a backlash. Prudent firms will adopt a simpler vision: it is the job of government to set the rules, and the job of companies to maximise value within these rules. That means delighting customers (including socially conscious ones), investing in profitable innovation (including in green technologies), and attracting workers (sometimes by paying them more). It doesn’t mean standing on a soap box. That is what politicians are paid (much less) to do. This article appears in “The World in 2020”, our annual edition that looks at the year ahead. See more at worldin.economist.com.