JAPAN IS THE world’s 11th-most-populous country and has its third-largest economy. It is peaceful, stable and democratic. Yet for all that the Land of the Rising Sun has little visibility on the global scene. The Japanese do not go around tooting their own horn; when foreigners mention the island nation it is usually to rave about a great holiday or a curious pastime. That will change in 2020. All eyes will be on Japan as Tokyo prepares to host the summer Olympics. The country’s leaders want to use that to Japan’s advantage. When it last hosted the summer games, in 1964, Japan seized on them as an opportunity to re-emerge onto the world stage after the second world war. The games showed it had transformed itself from a militaristic power into a peaceful and responsible member of the international community. Japan demonstrated that it had risen from the ashes of economic ruin to become a technological whizz kid, debuting flashy new infrastructure and technology, such as the shinkansen, or bullet train.  Five decades on, Japan has similarly bold hopes for what it will get out of its costly and, in many quarters, unpopular hosting of the games. Since its economic bubble burst in the early 1990s, Japan has tended to be seen as past its heyday. But as America, Britain and other Western countries struggle with divisions that are straining their democracies, and illiberal states such as China grow in stature, Japan’s leaders reckon the country can play a role in promoting the liberal norms that have served the world so well in the post-war era, and reminding other countries of their benefits. The home of iconic inventions such as the Walkman, the PlayStation and the Prius will also try once again to boost its image as being at the cutting edge of technology—a reputation which has been battered by fierce competition from America, China and South Korea. Robots will be out in force at Olympic venues, greeting guests and picking up heavy sports-equipment. There are plans to use a flying car, made by Toyota, Japan’s carmaking giant, to light the Olympic flame. In some ways Japan is well positioned to have more clout in the world. Since Shinzo Abe, the prime minister, returned to office in 2012, the country has become more assertive. Take trade. In 2018 Japan led the Trans-Pacific Partnership, a huge trade deal signed by 11 states, to conclusion once President Donald Trump had pulled America out of it. It is now working on the Regional Comprehensive Pacific Partnership, a trade deal involving South-East Asian states and their partners. And in 2020 Mr Abe will try to change Japan’s pacifist constitution, though it will be hard. It currently stymies Japan’s ability to take part in any military action, limiting what Japan can do at home as well as what it can contribute to missions abroad. Mr Abe has already brought in legislation that allows Japan to play a bigger, though still limited, role in international peacekeeping missions. But there are more than a few obstacles both to how Japan wants to be seen and what it can do. The country is struggling with rapid depopulation and ageing that are affecting its economic growth and public finances. It lags behind its developed-country counterparts on many fronts, from gender equality to environmental protections. In the run-up to the Olympics, which the organisers promised would be the most environmentally friendly ever, the country will curb its excessive use of single-use plastics. Further, many Japanese people are wary of their country becoming more prominent internationally, especially if it involves military adventures abroad. And Mr Abe, the architect of that goal, is soon to leave office—in autumn 2021 at the latest. That threatens to make him a lame duck in 2020, as rivals jostle for power. Once he is gone, there is no obvious successor with the same ambition, clout and, probably, staying-power. That means Japan’s grandiose global ambitions may prove to be as fleeting as the Olympics themselves. This article appears in “The World in 2020”, our annual edition that looks at the year ahead. See more atworldin.economist.com.