IT IS 8AM on a September Sunday in Kranj, a half-hour drive from Slovenia’s capital, Ljubljana, and Christian Bindhammer is staring at a blank wall. It is his canvas. In a few hours it will be transformed from 182 square metres of drab beige and grey into a fever dream of Kandinsky colours. A week later it will be unveiled to 1,300 spectators. Within a month, another 180,000 will have beheld it on YouTube. Mr Bindhammer is not an artist, as such. But there is a beauty to what he does. With plastic “jibs” no bigger than two £1 coins stacked on top of each other, bigger amorphous blobs made of resin or fibreglass and brightly coloured “volumes”—cubes, cylinders, tetrahedrons and stranger, compound shapes—that might be the size of a sofa, he will make this featureless, overhanging wall into a sublime physical challenge for some of the world’s best sportsmen and -women.  The competitors in the “lead climbing” world cup arranged by the International Federation of Sport Climbing (IFSC) need things up which to climb. This year, in Kranj, it is Mr Bindhammer’s task to provide those things. Every stage of the competition will require a unique route, never seen before, which tests the different facets of a multifaceted sport: strength, endurance, flexibility, footwork, mental fortitude. Because climbing is one of the rare elite sports not to favour a specific body type, the routes must be equally challenging to diminutive featherweights and towering beefcakes. Ideally, there will be points that require the sort of crowd-pleasing leaps that thrill aficionados and casual viewers alike. The walls ought to look stunning, too. There are further demands. In other sports where athletes face obstacle courses the competitors are expected to make it to the end, either as quickly—downhill skiing, kayak slalom—or showily—freestyle snowboarding—as possible. Show-jumpers are expected to finish their rounds, too, though with points deducted for faults. Lead climbing is not like that. What matters is how far you get before falling. So Mr Bindhammer’s walls have to be hard enough that few, if any, will top them, but not have any specific passage so hard that everyone falls at the same point, effectively making the competition a draw. It is like designing a slalom in which each skier crashes out at a different gate. Mr Bindhammer is part of the IFSC’s elite group of 31 “route-setters”. Of that group, nine are from France, a reminder of that country’s dominance of sport-climbing in the 1990s. The rest are a mix of Germans, Italians, Poles and other Europeans, as well as a few Japanese. Only two of the 31 are women. In recent years, female participation in the sport has grown—men and women now compete in roughly equal numbers—but in their gender as in their Frenchness the route-setters reflect an earlier time. The IFSC is looking to do something about this. The venue in Kranj, a municipal sports hall which on weekdays teems with pupils taking their PE classes, has hosted climbing world cups since 1996. Its wall is steep, which in climber-speak means not vertical but severely overhanging: 13 metres high and jutting out by 10 metres, for an average incline of negative 36 degrees. This basic architecture has not changed in 23 years. The style of routes charted on it has. So have climbing competitions, and the sport itself. Next year, climbing will reach what is often seen as a sport’s pinnacle when, in Tokyo, it makes its Olympic debut. The International Olympic Committee (IOC) wants to attract younger audiences to its ageing franchise, and climbing has the vibe they are looking for. Tokyo was keen; climbing is popular in Japan. The games will involve two other disciplines as well as lead climbing. “Speed climbing” is where competitors race each other up a standardised sequence of holds, the same in each tournament, on a 15-metre-high wall with a five-degree overhang. “Bouldering” involves climbing up a low rockface, usually no more than two metres off the ground. How all this will grab the public, young and otherwise, remains to be seen. But creating all the lead routes and boulders will mean a great deal of high-pressure work, on a vastly public stage, for Mr Bindhammer and his colleagues. Your correspondent started rock-climbing as a student in Poland 20 years ago, when an early commercial climbing gym opened in the bowels of the Warsaw University library. Since then the once-niche pursuit has gone mainstream. Indoor climbing walls have mushroomed around the world, including in some unlikely places: 22 Bishopsgate, a snazzy new office tower in London’s financial district, has installed one between the 25th and 26th floors. Britain’s capital has around 30 commercial climbing gyms, twice as many as in 2012. Tokyo is said to have more than 100. Stefano Ghisolfi, a star of Team Italy, recently modelled for Intimissimi, an underwear firm. Shauna Coxey, a top British climber, is sponsored by Aldi, a grocer. In March the Oscar for best documentary was awarded to a film, “Free Solo”, about a ropeless ascent of El Capitan, a 1km-high hulk of granite in Yosemite Valley, California by Alex Honnold, a leading American climber. The film brought to the masses not just the physicality and the raw courage of the sport, but also its subtler grace and its knottily intellectual side. Marc Le Menestrel, an accomplished climber and author, who also teaches decision theory at the INSEAD business school in Singapore, talks of the sport’s quest for “movement and beauty” as well as its “intellectual casse-tête”. The job of the route-setter is to make that experience possible and bring it out in its highest form. They are not just sculptors of walls; they are choreographers, forcing athletes into a vertical ballet in which they have to think on their fingertips and on their tippytoes. Route-setters have much in common. They are lean, with Popeye forearms, callused palms and finger joints gnarled from years of squeezing tiny edges. Like everyone, they are prone to bias. No one can stop being French, or flexible, or tall, says Mr Le Menestrel. They have personal styles and imbibe national ones (“French style” is elegant and static, Japanese fearless and dynamic). And they are sturdy. A few hours of setting and testing competition-style bouldering routes at the Climbing Works in Sheffield, a gym part-owned by Percy Bishton, the IFSC’s British head of route-setting, left your reasonably fit correspondent with scraped forearms, scuffed shins, skinless fingertips, and a whole body of aches with which to come into work the next day. Mr Bishton was undoubtedly in better shape as he boarded a plane to Qatar to set bouldering routes for the World Beach Games. The routes he sets now are much harder than those tackled at the first international sport-climbing competition, held in the Italian Alps in 1985. Back then, the routes were set by nature, in that the competitors climbed up a natural outdoor cliff near the town of Bardonecchia. That approach gives an unfair advantage to people familiar with the host crag, which is one of the reasons that the sport now favours unique creations indoors; they can be kept under wraps. Unlike natural stonescapes, which climbers frown on tampering with, indoor routes can also be fine-tuned. The first indoor competition took place in Vaulx-en-Velin near the French city of Lyon the following year. The route-setter’s craft was born. Like all experts, route-setting teams are inclined to groupthink. A certain “intersubjectivity” is required in order to curb this, says Mr Le Menestrel philosophically. Mr Bindhammer’s Kranj crew included two other IFSC-certified colleagues—Yann Genoux, a full-time French route-setter living in Britain, and Martin Hammerer, a software engineer from Austria—and three apprentices. They vary in size—from Mr Genoux, who is 172cm tall (5ft 6) and weighs 60kg (130lb), to Luke Brady, an American who is 15cm taller and 22kg heavier—and expertise. What old-timers like Mr Bindhammer, a multiple world-cup finalist who has repeated some of the world’s toughest rock climbs, and Mr Bishton lack in raw power they make up for in cunning. You don’t need to be as strong as the competitors—“If we were, we would be competing,” quips Mr Genoux (who himself used to). You must, though, be strong enough to understand what they are capable of—and, critically, what they are not. The subtleties of their art have been enriched by a growth in the forms available to them. In the 1990s all the holds they would stick to the wall resembled fist-sized lumps of rock. Screwed onto flat panels, that made for “two-dimensional” climbing, says Mr Bindhammer. Today’s panoply of jibs, blobs and larger volumes makes things much more three-dimensional. Today’s routes are thus “much more fun to climb”, says Adam Ondra, a Czech climber crowned men’s world champion in August. Many of the boulders Mr Bishton and his team put up in Sheffield used bulky, featureless volumes. Climbing them can feel more like wrestling a fridge than scaling a ladder. The Olympics will bring fresh challenges. Broadcasters are demanding more predictable schedules. The IFSC has already cut the time athletes have to complete their lead attempts from eight minutes to six, putting slower-paced competitors at a disadvantage. Including all three formats—speed, boulder and lead—for a combined score makes it harder to get the difficulty just right. Speed climbers and boulderers, who often lack stamina, may fall early from a lead route; some lead specialists may struggle with difficult boulders. Route-setters may need to rethink their plans in light of the eventual finals line-up, though new design software to help them rework routes on screen is being tested. TV’s insistence on “tops” means route-setters may err on the side of simplicity, putting off many seasoned climbers. “When I see a top, unless it’s the last climber, I lose interest,” says Mr Ondra. The hope is that these constraints won’t erase the human element. If they ever did, says Mr Le Menestrel, you would have “perfect rules, no judgment, no beauty”. And, ultimately, “no fun”. Sometimes the climbers are more creative than the route-setters could have imagined, surprising them with unexpected sequences. “There is no formula,” says Mr Bishton, any more than there is an algorithm for the perfect “Swan Lake”. In the Kranj sports hall there are several dozen “volumes” of different sizes and 20 boxes of smaller holds. The flashiest were used on the final round, which was set first. The men, it was decided, would climb on a set of regular geometric shapes in black and white. The women would negotiate a series of bulbous blue and red “slopers” (curved surfaces with little or no edge to them, held by skin friction alone) and “pinches” (which climbers squeeze with their hands like a vice). Jibs were affixed here and there to the big features, as thumb catches or footholds. Mr Bindhammer and a colleague clambered up a wonky scaffolding to the top-left corner of the wall, the end of the women’s final, and worked down. They hoisted up volumes from the floor using ropes, one or two at a time, and attached them to the wall with handheld power drills. Mr Genoux and Mr Hammerer started on the bottom of the men’s final in the opposite corner, working upwards. Four hours later the basic skeleton of both routes was ready. Fortified by a lunch of cured ham, cheese and rye bread, the crew then crept up their creations to test them out. Any move that seemed off kilter was carefully analysed. Holds deemed too far apart for short climbers were brought closer together. Those too near for taller competitors’ larger frames were placed farther apart. This finicky work—sometimes transposing a hold by an inch, or rotating it by a few degrees, turning a move from undoable to easy—lasted into the night and continued the next morning. When Mr Bindhammer was content, the holds’ precise placement was carefully documented and the wall was stripped bare again. The process began anew for the competition’s earlier rounds. More fiddling happened once the event got going. Routes in later rounds can be tweaked depending on how climbers fare in earlier ones. In Kranj, the men’s final went to plan. Only Mr Ondra reached the top. The women’s route was simplified after the semi-final proved more challenging than the route-setters had expected and the favourite, Slovenia’s Janja Garnbret, failed to make the final eight. Despite the last-minute tweaks none of the women got within ten moves of the top. Four fell at the same move barely half way up. Route-setters are human. So are climbers. ■