BRITAIN MADE the cover of The Economist 12 times in the most turbulent year since the Brexit referendum of 2016. The events of 2019 stretched the country’s constitution to its limits, as a weakened executive branch clashed with an emboldened legislature, before being put in its place by the judiciary. Even the queen was dragged into the mess. The year got off to a rocky start on January 15th when Theresa May—remember her?—put forward her long-awaited Brexit deal for a vote in the House of Commons. The deal, which she had spent virtually her whole premiership negotiating over with the European Union, was rejected by 432 votes to 202. Her own Conservative backbenchers voted against it by three to one. No plan by any modern British government has ever been so overwhelmingly defeated.  How did Mrs May respond? By trying the same thing again. On March 13th, just two weeks ahead of the date on which Britain would drop out of the EU without any arrangements in place, she put the deal to Parliament again—and again MPs said no. Mrs May had boasted that week of “send[ing] a message to the whole world about the sort of country the United Kingdom will be”. She was not wrong: it was a laughing-stock. Two weeks later, she bowed to the inevitable and announced that she would step down. Amid this parliamentary drama we took a step back to look at some of the broader effects of Brexit. One is the risk to the City, not only a crucial part of the British economy but one of the world’s great financial centres. The twin risks of Brexit and a Jeremy Corbyn-led Labour government threatened to change the workings of the global financial system, we argued. Another consequence of Brexit is that Britain’s uncodified constitution is being tested as seldom before. Intended to be adaptable and robust, Britain’s unwritten constitution was in danger of amplifying the chaos caused by Brexit, in a way that threatened the union itself. Who might tackle these problems, which had so overwhelmed Mrs May? By June it was clear that the next prime minister would be Boris Johnson, the overwhelming favourite among Conservative Party members, who had by now persuaded sceptical fellow MPs that he had the best chance of winning an election for the Tories. But which Boris would Britain get? Mr Johnson’s success lay in persuading everyone that he would govern in just the way they wanted. To liberal Tories, he was the former mayor of cosmopolitan London who had spoken in favour of immigration and, at one point, of EU enlargement. To right-wingers he was the hardline Brexiteer who talked up the prospect of leaving with no deal and used casually racist language. Shortly after taking office in July, Mr Johnson confirmed his critics’ worst fears by suspending Parliament in order to try to stop it from legislating against no-deal. The plan backfired, uniting rebel MPs who had until this point sat on their hands. Before Parliament could be packed up, they passed a law that would force Mr Johnson to seek an extension of the Brexit negotiating period. The prime minister was further humiliated in September when the Supreme Court judged that his earlier suspension of Parliament had been unlawful. MPs returned to work the next day. Forced to request a Brexit extension and facing a struggle to get anything much through Parliament, Mr Johnson begged the House of Commons for an election. Labour declined the contest until the extension period had safely begun. On December 12th voters faced an unappealing choice between Mr Johnson’s promise of a hard Brexit and Mr Corbyn’s vow to “rewrite the rules of the economy” along radical socialist lines. It was a battle between the most unpopular new government and the most unpopular leader of the opposition since polling began. We could not bring ourselves to support either, and gave our endorsement instead to the Liberal Democrats. Voters ignored us. Mr Johnson won a famous victory, getting the Tories their biggest majority since 1987 and helping to reduce Labour to its lowest tally of seats since 1935. The result has redrawn Britain’s political map. The Tories now hold Leave-voting seats in the north and the Midlands that had voted Labour for the best part of a century. The parliamentary logjam that obstructed British politics for most of 2019 has been cleared. Mr Johnson, who began 2019 as a backbench member of a party that was on the ropes, starts 2020 as the most powerful prime minister since Tony Blair. Even then, he may struggle to keep his election promise to “get Brexit done”.