Below is a selection of The Economist’s coverage of abortion laws in America, and other resources used in the production of the film “How America politicised abortion”. Abortion is an increasingly divisive political issue in America. Since his election, President Donald Trump has consistently encouraged the passing of stricter laws against abortion. During his time in office, nine states have passed so-called “heartbeat bills” that would ban abortions after six or eight weeks. Others, though, have gone in a different direction and put in place extra protections for abortion rights. This year Illinois, Maine, New York, Rhode Island and Vermont have all passed laws loosening restrictions on abortion later in pregnancy. What impact is this split having?  The Supreme Court will review abortion-clinic rules in Louisiana - The Economist, October 5th 2019 What explains Donald Trump’s war on late-term abortions? - The Economist, August 24th 2019 Missouri’s only abortion clinic loses its licence - The Economist, Jun 24th 2019 How to read the Supreme Court’s latest ruling on abortion rights - The Economist, May 29th 2019 “Roe v Wade will be slowly and steadily chipped away”—abortion in America - The Economist, May 21st 2019   Why red states are passing laws banning early abortions - The Economist, March 27th 2019 Why Donald Trump will make abortion a big issue in the run-up to 2020 - The Economist, February 7th 2019 Abortion Trends by Party Identification - Gallup Mary Ziegler, a professor at Florida State University College of Law, explains how abortion was legalised and how the debate became polarised.   Abortion: The war that never ends - The Economist, January 16th 2003 What to do? Compared with other Western countries, America is not such an outlier on abortion as it sometimes appears. A large, stable majority of Americans favours keeping abortion legal in the first two trimesters. But rather than reflecting public opinion, America’s lawmakers have found it more useful to inflame it. In our leader pages earlier this year we argued that they should “compromise on what most Americans think reasonable. That looks unlikely now. But in democracies problems often look insoluble—until, suddenly, something changes.” A majority of Americans want abortion to be legal in the first two trimesters - The Economist, May 16th 2019 The interminable abortion war - The Economist, February 16th 2019