MATTERS OF LIFE and death have long occupied Christian Boltanski. Why do some people survive while others perish? What role does chance play in life? Is it really possible to remember the dead? For a man so obsessed with humans’ demise, the French artist is remarkably cheerful. “I love life,” he told your correspondent in 2016, “but there is no reason to hide the truth. You look at a baby and you know it is going to die.” Art is Mr Boltanski’s way of resisting obliteration. For more than 50 years he has used film, photography and installations to build memorials in the form of archives of names and faces that honour the passing of ordinary lives. With the help of the artist, the Pompidou Centre in Paris has assembled a powerful survey of that work.  Born in occupied Paris in 1944, Mr Boltanski is the son of Jewish doctor and a left-wing Catholic writer. At the beginning of the war, the couple divorced as a precaution, staging a loud argument for the neighbours’ benefit. His father then went into hiding in a gap between two floors of their apartment, only slipping out occasionally to be with his wife (“I’m living proof of that,” the artist quips). After the war, the family reunited, and clung to one another by essentially camping in one big room. Mr Boltanski did not go to school after the age of ten. Encouraged by his mother and older brother, he began making art, but rarely left the apartment by himself. Family friends were mostly Holocaust survivors. In the exhibition, items in a vitrine show him, aged 25, converting the oddity of his childhood into art: a tuft of hair, a piece of pullover, plus little “traps” he had made embedded with pins and blades. More significant is “Photo Album of Family D” (1971): 150 black-and-white family snaps given to him by a friend, which he enlarged, blurred and mounted on the wall. This was the “normal” family he never had; included by Harald Szeemann, a pioneering international curator, in the Documenta 5 art fair in 1972, the work set the artist on route to international recognition. In the 1990s, Mr Boltanski discovered a small town in Switzerland where the local paper ran a picture of every person who died. This inspired his “Dead Swiss” series, in which he has attached these tiny, often smiling, images of the dead to biscuit tins, suggesting there is more about the person inside. At the Pompidou, the tins are piled up precariously into towers. The “Dead Swiss” are both Everyman figures and one of the ways Mr Boltanski has found to talk about the Shoah. What troubles him most about the Holocaust is that, as individuals, people just vanished, with nothing to mark their death. The show in Paris highlights Mr Boltanski’s growing conviction that the objects made by artists are less important than the ideas they embody. In 2005, for example, he began creating an archive of heartbeats, starting with an amplification of his own, synched to a pulsating lightbulb. Visitors to his exhibitions have contributed their heartbeats and more than 70,000 recordings are now stored on Teshima, a Japanese “art island”. “The Japanese travel there on a pilgrimage, and if they don’t know who Boltanski is it really doesn’t matter,” he says in an interview printed in the exhibition’s catalogue. “We live on through mythologies which are more powerful than works and those who produce them.” At the Pompidou, a heartbeat lightbulb is enclosed in a dark space surrounded by black mirrors, in which visitors catch ghostly glimpses of themselves. Equally unsettling is “Twilight” (2015, pictured): a mass of glowing lightbulbs that spill across the floor. The space gradually darkens as, one by one, the lights are extinguished during the course of the show. But the artist’s recent work is increasingly light and poetic—and often staged outdoors. For “Mysteries” (2017) he travelled to Patagonia and, with the help of acoustic engineers, installed three horns that turn in the wind and emit sounds similar to whale song. “Animitas” (2014) also first emerged in the wilds of South America. Inspired by makeshift roadside shrines, Mr Boltanski planted a field of Japanese bells that “sing” in the breeze in the Chilean desert. He has since repeated the exercise in other countries including Japan and Canada. Over time, the bells—and the whale horns—will decay and disappear, but both projects are gloriously captured for posterity on film. As with the heartbeats, the artist hopes, there is a story to be passed on. “Christian Boltanski: Faire son temps” is on display at the Pompidou Centre, Paris, until March 16th 2020