IF AN EFFECTIVE international agreement to curb climate change were not a tough enough nut to crack, consider the scale of the challenge facing the United Nations Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD): to protect the biological, ecological and genetic diversity that sustains all life on Earth. Progress has been slow to non-existent. Governments are meant to turn this around at a summit in Kunming, China, in October 2020. The CBD was one of a trio of conventions to come out of the Rio Earth Summit in 1992, along with the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change and the UN Convention to Combat Desertification. Together, these were intended to support a comprehensive strategy for sustainable development.  The climate element has taken centre stage in recent years, but to ecologists biodiversity is no less critical. Humans rely on there being a diversity of plants and animals in order to feed themselves. Indirectly, this biodiversity is also a key contributor to health, through medicines which are often inspired by molecules found in nature, and other basic needs such as clean water. Ocean bivalves, for instance, help clean up toxic spills, and even tiny ocean plankton help form rain-bearing clouds. Yet modern civilisation is impinging on virtually every ecosystem. In 2010, after nearly two decades of discussions among the 196 countries that are party to the CBD, 20 conservation targets were adopted: the Aichi targets, named after the Japanese prefecture where they were finalised. They were ambitious, to put it mildly. The text reads like a wish-list for a perfect future in which every human is aware of the value of biodiversity, every government has integrated this into its policies, nefarious subsidies are eliminated, all fishing is sustainable and pollution is under control. The delivery date for this Utopia was 2020. Unsurprisingly, an intergovernmental report on biodiversity published early in 2019 found that progress on the Aichi targets was poor. Indeed, overall, species are accelerating towards extinction. Despite the bleak landscape, conservationists are optimistic that 2020 could mark a new beginning. They are calling for a “Paris-like moment for biodiversity”, in reference to the Paris agreement in 2015 on climate change. In Kunming, they hope, all 196 parties will adopt a new and more realistic framework to protect biodiversity. Already, there is an awareness that any new targets must be more quantitative and preferably achievable. They may include a key number, which would through its symbolism and simplicity mimic the 1.5º-2º C target for limiting the impacts of climate change and would, with luck, result in a similar worldwide buy-in. The concept of “bending the curve” may help frame such a number: there are calls to halt the loss of biodiversity by 2030 in order to shift the focus towards restoration by 2050. How exactly to define and quantify that loss under the new framework—whether as a number of species, or some measure of ecosystem or genetic health—is still an open question. The bigger issue is how to integrate the talks about bio­diversity with those on climate, desertification, forests, wetlands and trade in endangered species. A month after governments meet in Kunming to discuss biodiversity they will reassemble in Glasgow for the next round of UN climate talks. That the degradation of ecosystems is responsible for 23% of global emissions suggests it would be more productive to bring these two sets of discussions, at a minimum, under one roof. This article appears in “The World in 2020”, our annual edition that looks at the year ahead. See more at worldin.economist.com.