NOT THAT many people know about the Waldensians, a reformist Christian sect dating from the 12th century which fled to mountains in the north of present-day Italy after harassment by the Catholic church. But today, in collaboration with their erstwhile persecutors, they serve as catalysts in an effort to respond creatively to Europe’s migration crisis. The “humanitarian corridors” initiative is an impressive case of inter-faith co-operation in a humanitarian cause. It was launched three years ago by leaders of Italy’s non-conformist Christians, a small but energetic minority, along with the Sant’Egidio community (pictured), a Catholic body known for relief and peace-making work. Under a pact with the Italian government, these faith-based charities stood ready to take responsibility for the entire cycle of a vulnerable migrant’s journey to Europe. This is how it works. Needy individuals, who may be unaccompanied minors, elderly, sick or in immediate danger of persecution, are identified at the point of departure (for example, a refugee camp in Lebanon) and then flown in safety to a European destination where they receive “humanitarian visas” and are helped to seek long-term asylum and adapt to their host country. That final stage may involve liaison with mosques. The concept took shape in Italy but has been adopted in three other countries (France, Belgium and tiny Andorra) and other humanitarian agencies, including Caritas, a big Catholic charity, and the Protestant churches of France. At least 2,000 people have benefited from this all-embracing care: a drop in the ocean when set against the migration crisis but, supporters say, an important assertion that rescuing people from leaky boats is not the only possible response. In launching the project, the good name and fullish coffers of the Waldensians were a help. Although their adherents number in the low tens of thousands, hundreds of thousands of Italians had chosen the sect as recipients of a small sliver of their income. (This reflected a fiscal arrangement under which Italians were asked to earmark 0.8% of their earnings either to a religious body or a state-run social assistance programme. The Waldensians’ reputation for effective humanitarian work made them a popular option.) In many different ways, coping with the needs of migrants is catalysing a change in the Western world’s religious scene, and social scientists are taking note. The “humanitarian corridors” project is one of five multi-faith initiatives considered in a piece of research described in the latest issue of Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies. (The others are an effort run by the British Red Cross in Southampton along with many local faith groups, and initiatives in Sweden, Germany and Poland in which churches, mosques and synagogues help migrants settle down.) Viewing the scene through a somewhat sceptical, secular lens, the article says the evidence “tentatively supports” the idea that multi-faith approaches can overcome the “well-documented” problems that arise when the integration of newcomers is handled by one religious group alone. When a single religious group is looking after new arrivals, it tends to favour its own adherents, ghetto-ise them and discourage them from making contacts in the wider community: such, at least, had been the finding of a raft of previous studies which the new article mentions. In Germany, the article notes, state funding for some integration projects was made conditional on more than one faith being involved. There were, it adds, some good reasons for this: “For migrants from countries where religion and religious identity has played a negative role in division and conflict…contact with religious organisations and individuals from apparently opposing sides can be a hugely beneficial and educative experience.” As interviewees in Germany had noted, “migrants from Middle Eastern countries are not used to religious freedom and seeing multi-religious co-operation helps them become accustomed to this unfamiliar idea.” That multi-faith principle might work well once migrants are breathing the relatively free and tolerant air of a Western host country. But what about projects which aim to pre-empt migration and trafficking by keeping people in their homeland? There the calculus might be different. Nashi is an organisation based in Canada which works in western Ukraine to protect young women at risk of being trafficked. It runs a vocational school where girls who have emerged from rough orphanages can acquire life-skills. The surrounding region is by European standards devoutly Christian, but divided. There is historic tension between Eastern-rite Catholics and various branches of the Orthodox church. The project’s founder, Savelia Curniski, described her experiences at a conference on trafficking organised in Istanbul last month by the Ecumenical Patriarchate, Orthodox Christianity’s senior authority. As she recalls, any altruistic initiative in Ukraine has to pick its way through sectarian suspicions, not usually fanned by churches but by sceptical individuals. Back in Canada, raising funds was an amicable enough multi-faith enterprise. Protestant and Jewish groups proved generous, as did Orthodox communities with no particular link to Ukraine. But on the ground in Ukraine, things were different. The only way the school could function was to leave all sectarian agendas at the door. People found it hard to believe that the project was not flying one denominational flag or another, and the charity had to work hard to overcome their scepticism by operating on secular lines. In prosperous, liberal places, active collaboration between religious groups for benign purposes may seem like a win-win formula. Βut in places where the environment is neither very prosperous nor very liberal, simply limiting the damage from sectarian tension may be more realistic.