BERGHAIN, a nightclub in Berlin, is notorious—partly for its electronic music, but mostly for its exclusivity and tolerance of drug use. Last week the venue, packed with ravers of all varieties and nationalities, had a different feel. Visitors moved to music that thumped at a pace between 200 and 300 beats per minute (a healthy human heart manages between 60 and 100). They were exposed to the sounds of singeli, nimble rap with ululating keyboard leads, from Tanzania; gabber, frenzied music that makes use of sirens and heavily distorted kick drums, from Indonesia; and a punishingly loud imitation of Cold War sonic weaponry, played from modified tanks rigged with amplifiers. The event was part of CTM Festival—a nine-day panoply of live performances, multisensory art installations and technology talks—which celebrated its 20th edition this year. A wide range of shows were hosted across the city’s venues. The penultimate evening, for example, was an exploration of the queer undercurrents of Arab electronica. A few days earlier, Afrofuturist poetry was married with modulating dub basslines. Even when the music hewed more closely to the familiar sounds of house and techno, it was being played by rising stars such as LSDXOXO, HVL and DJ Rachael, who came to prominence livening up the underground scenes in their respective cities of New York, Tbilisi and Kampala. Berlin, which prides itself on staying ahead of the cultural curve, is championing electronic music produced further afield. In the past, the most prominent artists have mostly been Western, white, male and straight, but in recent years the curiosity of open-minded listeners has been piqued. In their search for new grooves, many have looked abroad, for fresh twists on old sounds. One of the breakout stars of 2018, Rosalía, became a critical darling for her electronic spin on flamenco, an Andalusian style of music that dates back to the 18th century. Her success reflects a demand for unusual, experimental tracks. Where the industry in America, Britain and Western Europe is now flush with cash and the events circuit feels familiar to aficionados, dance music in many countries is a means to celebrate unity and resist governmental control (as indeed it was in East Berlin in the 1980s). In Lisbon, the mistreated Angolan immigrant population has heavily influenced Príncipe Discos, the city’s premier record label; local artists put a new spin on Angolan dance styles such as kuduo and tarraxinha. In São Paulo, the Mamba Negra collective and associated artists meld live instruments and the confrontational style of punk music with DJ tools. They have formed a strong network with LGBT musicians around the world; and their work has gained significance as Jair Bolsonaro, Brazil’s nativist president, threatens minority rights. As European techno often relies heavily on software and replicable successes, musical innovation and the introduction of new themes is rare. By contrast, the production of African electronic music is fast-paced and constantly incorporates different styles, instruments and samples. Songs are quickly recorded and disseminated via Whatsapp, a messaging service, or on hard drives, allowing artists to respond to other hits, trends and the whims of their fans. Nyege Nyege Tapes, an East African record label that was prominent at CTM, has helped to generate awareness of many new genres that have sprung up in the region, such as singeli, born on the streets of Dar es Salaam in the mid 2000s, which until recently were not known to European music fans. Western techno risks becoming stultifyingly repetitive and boring. Jonas Rönnberg, a Swedish musician and provocateur, recently criticised the “hamster wheel” of rote club music and its unadventurous audiences. But on the evidence of CTM, at least, it is making room for more invigorating acts. Established musicians are no longer guaranteed top billing; young female, transgender and non-Western artists are at last finding eager listeners.