IN NOVEMBER 2017 Ralph Northam defeated Ed Gillespie in Virginia’s gubernatorial election, largely on the strength of his appeal to non-white voters. Mr Northam ran up huge margins in the diverse northern counties around Washington, DC and in the heavily African-American Tidewater area in the state’s south-eastern corner. Non-white voters make up one-third of Virginia’s electorate, and 80% of them voted for Mr Northam, including 87% of black voters, and 91% of black women. His victory came just months after a far-right rally in Charlottesville at which an anti-racist protestor was murdered; it presaged Democratic victories later that year in Alabama, where Doug Jones took Jeff Sessions’s old Senate seat, and in the following year’s mid-terms. It was especially shocking, therefore, when on February 1st a conservative website unearthed Mr Northam’s medical-school yearbook page, which featured a photograph of a man in blackface standing next to one in a Ku Klux Klan outfit. Mr Northam’s response was swift. The same day said he was “deeply sorry for the decision I made to appear as I did in the photo and for the hurt that decision caused then and now.” The following day, however, he reversed that position, saying he was not in the picture, and suggesting it had wound up on his yearbook page by mistake (he also claimed never to have previously seen the yearbook). At a press conference he admitted to having “darkened my face as part of a Michael Jackson costume” in 1984—the year he graduated from medical school. He then joked about how difficult it is to get shoe polish off one’s face. He also said he had no idea how he got the nickname “Coonman” as an undergraduate. Mr Northam has so far resisted calls for his resignation, which have come from every major Democratic presidential candidate, both of Virginia’s senators, its Democratic congressional delegation, the Virginia Democratic Party, the state’s Legislative Black Caucus and its chapter of the National Association for the Advancement of Coloured People (NAACP). Nancy Pelosi, Douglas Wilder (Virginia’s only African-American governor, who served from 1990 to 1994), his own attorney-general and Terry McAuliffe, his predecessor, have also called for Mr Northam to step down. Waiting in the wings, meanwhile, is Justin Fairfax, the state’s 39-year-old African-American lieutenant-governor. Mr Fairfax has sensibly remained quiet, neither calling for Mr Northam’s resignation nor offering any public statements of support. Mr Northam may be, as Mr McAuliffe put it, “a good, moral, decent man,” but his resignation now appears inevitable. Excuses about youth and changing times do not let him off the hook. In 1984 Mr Northam was a 25-year-old man. Wearing blackface has long been offensive. Perhaps if he had come forward, admitted his actions and explained how he had since evolved, the calls for his resignation would not be so loud. And no doubt he has changed. He would not wear blackface now. But the governorship is a position of public trust, and Mr Northam appears to have lost that. Republicans, predictably, have called for his resignation, prompting charges of hypocrisy. Kevin McCarthy, the House Republican leader, condemned Mr Northam’s “egregious lack of respect for human dignity and the American values that we fight every day to uphold.” Last month he stripped Steve King, a Republican congressman from Iowa, of his committee assignments after Mr King wondered out loud how the term “white supremacist” had come to be considered offensive. Mr McCarthy did not ask Mr King to resign. The furore over Mr Northam reveals one party grappling with racism in America—and in particular, with what the consequences should be for past behaviour—and the other avoiding such a debate. That is likely to lead to unequal outcomes. Mr Northam may, justifiably, feel that is unfair. But in the long list of race-related injustices in America, it comes near the bottom.