WORRIES ABOUT screen time are increasingly common. Parents (and some health professionals) fret that young people who bask, zombie-like, in the cold glow of television, computer and mobile-phone screens could be storing up a range of social, physical, mental and cognitive problems for their future selves. Children are certainly spending a growing chunk of time looking at screens. Figures from Britain’s Office of National Statistics show, for example, that in 2010-11 8.6% of children aged under 16 said they spent more than three hours on social networks on a normal school day; by 2015-16 that figure had risen to 12.8%. At the same time, according to the National Health Service, the proportion of children aged 5-15 with mental disorders rose from 9.7% in 1999 to 11.2% in 2017. Are these sets of numbers linked? In short: nobody knows. The limited evidence available suggests that the negative effects of screen time on mental health are tiny and not worth worrying about. But solid research is lacking. Ask any scientist if screen time has alarming effects on children and he will invariably ask in return: what do you mean by “screen time”? It could refer to anything from doing homework on an iPad and reading books on a Kindle to watching television and playing video games. Investigating the effects of screen time is like trying to measure the effects of food on people’s waistlines—it depends on the kind of food they eat, how often, and external factors such as exercise. There is evidence to suggest that children who play video games are more sedentary and eat more high-calorie foods, and therefore end up with a higher risk of obesity and diabetes. But it is also true that inactive children are more likely to spend time in front of video games. As a recently released report by Britain’s chief medical officers puts it, “An association has been observed but cause and effect are not yet fully understood”. It is the same with sleep problems. Children who are contactable on social media at all times may struggle to remain alert during school hours. But again, those who are unable to sleep for a variety of reasons could also be more motivated to use their screens at night. Other concerns could be attributed to generational differences. Watching children absorbed by Minecraft or Fortnite could be a jarring experience for parents unfamiliar with video games. It might lead them to wonder what is happening to their offspring’s brains. They may forget that video games can also be rich social experiences. Minecraft, for example, is often used by children as a social-media platform, a place where they can hang out and talk to their friends. The only way to respond to this sort of looming panic is to collect good evidence. Studying the relationship between screen time and health is difficult, though, because self-reported data on smartphone and screen use do not always reflect reality. Richer datasets can be mined from social-media companies, which gather data on what someone is posting, who is reading what, and what people do with the information. Only those kinds of data could provide scientists with the detailed models of human behaviour and well-being they need in order to identify potential harms and benefits. (Such information could also help those wishing to track how fake news spreads or to stop online bullying and radicalisation.) But getting access to those data would require private companies to open up their secret vaults. Until they do so, it is likely that anecdotes and biases will fill the void where scientific evidence is missing.