BENEATH STRINGS of fairy lights, a record plays on a turntable. It could be the backdrop for a suburban summer barbecue but, in Katie Paterson’s hands, everyday objects are rarely what they seem. Here, the festooned lightbulbs represent Ara, a constellation identified by Ptolemy, a 2nd-century astronomer; their varying luminosity reflects the brightness of each star. The turntable, meanwhile, is playing Vivaldi’s “Four Seasons”. The record revolves in time with Earth, completing a rotation once a day, which makes its movement imperceptible and the music almost impossible to hear. Ms Paterson’s work blends poetry and science. Now 38 years old, the Scottish artist’s breakout piece, “Vatnajökull (the sound of)”, embedded a phone in a lake below a glacier; she invited people to dial a number and listen to the ice melting. Since then, she has simulated moonlight in a lightbulb, made maps of dead stars and sent a meteorite back to space. An arts graduate with no scientific expertise, Ms Paterson’s fascination with the universe began while she was living in Iceland. She became obsessed with the beauty of moonlight; it prompted her to contemplate deep time and space as well as the outer limits of human knowledge. “I live in my head a lot of the time. I’m a bit of a daydreamer,” she says. “The idea at the heart of a work is the most important part for me.” Her comments mark her out as a conceptual artist—which, to some, will suggest art that is dry as dust and not very visually engaging. “A place that exists only in moonlight”, a new survey of Ms Paterson’s work at Turner Contemporary, Margate, tells a different story. Unsurprisingly, she calls it an “exhibition of ideas”. To underline the point, there are 30 “Ideas” on show, haiku-like poems that represent the point where her inchoate thoughts solidify into a neat string of words. “A solar flare/ containing all the light/ in the universe” runs one; “The universe rewound/ and played back/ in real time” reads another. Printed in silver type, the “Ideas” are interspersed with watercolours by J.M.W. Turner. This is Turner at his most abstract and Romantic, capturing the light changing or the sea in turmoil. The paintings highlight his fascination with the sublime, a fascination which Ms Paterson clearly shares. “Cosmic Spectrum” (pictured, above), a new work that opens the exhibition, similarly combines an arresting idea with a visual spectacle. With the aid of a gently spinning colour wheel, Ms Paterson presents a history of starlight, from the Big Bang to the end of the universe as scientists envisage it. A helpful text explains the progression from the first hot, bright blue stars 200m years ago to a projected colder, darker far future, dominated by red dwarfs. The artist was inspired to create the work when she discovered that astronomers refer to the current colour of the universe as “Cosmic Latte”. “You don’t think of the universe as being beige, do you?” Ms Paterson laughs. For more than 10 years, Ms Paterson has built relationships with scientists at the European Space Agency, NASA and elsewhere, and she relies on their expertise for her art. “A History of Darkness”, an ongoing project, was born from a research trip to Hawaii with Richard Ellis, a professor of astronomy. There they surveyed the furthest visible points of the universe through a telescope and began to assemble an archive of images of darkness, from different times and places in the history of the universe. In “The Dying Star Letters” (2011-16, pictured below) Ms Paterson posted dispatches—sometimes as many as 150 a week—from Japan, Berlin, or wherever she happened to be, to Mr Ellis in California, formally announcing each individual stellar death. The mostly handwritten letters, displayed across one wall, bring a tone of sadness to an otherwise dry scientific fact. At one end of the final room, “Totality” (2016, pictured top), a slowly revolving mirrored disco ball, bathes the ceiling and walls in some 10,000 tiny images of solar eclipses. At the other, an automated grand piano plays a “moon-altered” version of Beethoven’s “Moonlight Sonata”. For this early project, created in 2007, Ms Paterson translated the composer’s famous work into Morse code and bounced it off the moon using radio waves. The slightly quirky, fragmented version is a result of information being absorbed by the moon’s shadows or lost in its craters—and is all the more haunting as a result. The two pieces make a mesmerising end to a thought-provoking show that invites the viewer to contemplate—and wonder at—the lesser-known corners of the universe. In its mix of sound, light and colour, “A place that exists only in moonlight” is an exhibition of ideas with much artistic substance. “A place that exists only in moonlight” is showing at Turner Contemporary, Margate, until May 6th