BY CONTEMPORARY standards the personal life of Zelda De Groen, who taught at a nursery school in north London, could hardly be described as unusual. She and her life-partner, a man who shared her Jewish heritage, lived together for a while and in due course they married. But there was a moment of awkwardness in May 2016, when the couple attended a barbecue organised by the kindergarten, which is affiliated to the Chabad Lubavitch movement of Hasidic Jews. Ms De Groen’s boyfriend let slip, in conversation with one of the school’s directors, that they were cohabiting. Staff at the school immediately worried that this living arrangement was out of step with the nursery’s ultra-Orthodox culture, and might alienate parents. A month later, the head teacher and managing director summoned Ms De Groen, who was then 23, to a meeting and told her cohabitation was wrong: it was time for her to marry and have children. As an employment hearing later heard, this conversation made the teacher very upset. She felt that she was under pressure to tell her bosses reassuring lies about the nature of her domestic partnership, but did not feel she should be forced to do so.  In July 2016 she received a letter saying that she had been dismissed with immediate effect. She appealed to an employment tribunal, which found that her employers had violated British equality legislation (which is based on European Union norms) by practising both religious and gender discrimination. But this week, there was a countervailing, if partial, victory for the school. In a judgment that will be studied carefully in many Western countries, a more senior judge opined that the nursery school was not, after all, guilty of religious discrimination, either direct or indirect. Only the accusation of sex-based discrimination (the complaint that Ms De Groen was unfairly treated because she was a woman) was allowed to stand. For people who study religion and equality across the Western world, the new decision will be recorded as one more instance of a judicial authority (in this case the Employment Appeal Tribunal in London) affirming the notion of “religious autonomy” or the entitlement of religious bodies and their affiliates to impose their own standards on their staff. Other examples of decisions in that spirit include the case of an American teacher who lost her unfair dismissal case on grounds that, as an instructor in a Lutheran-linked school in Michigan she was technically a “minister” and was therefore entitled to a lower level of protection; and the vindication by the European Court of Human Rights of the Spanish Catholic church over the case of a priest who lost his teaching job after marrying and protesting against celibacy rules. Contentiously, the judge in the latest case argued that a significant precedent had been set by the “gay cake” saga concerning a Christian-run bakery in Belfast. That story concluded last October with a ruling from Britain’s Supreme Court that the devout bakers were within their rights when they declined to prepare a cake adorned with the words “support gay marriage”. According to this week’s ruling, the gay-cake verdict served to highlight an important feature of Britain’s European-inspired equality legislation. That legislation was designed to protect people who were victims of discrimination because they had one or other protected characteristic (religion, race, gender and so on) but it was not particularly concerned with the motivations or characteristics, including religion, of the perpetrators of discrimination. (In other words, whether or not the school was going too far in laying down an ultra-conservative Jewish ethos was strictly speaking, outside the scope of the legislation. This suggests that Ms De Groen would have fared better if she had stressed her own distinctive moral position.) Well, maybe so, some will retort, but that was hardly the main point of the gay-cake verdict, which had to do with sensitive issues of freedom of speech, communication and conscience that are absent from this latest case. Tom Heys, an employment lawyer who works for the London firm of Lewis Silkin, thinks the new ruling will make life a bit easier for religious employers, but they should avoid over-using their prerogatives.  “This will make it somewhat easier for them to impose their own ethos,” he said. “But they should do so cautiously, and be very specific about what their requirements are, or they may still run the risk of burdensome litigation and unwelcome publicity.”