FORGET THE weather forecast. South Africans these days are more interested in the outlook for rolling blackouts. The country’s most-downloaded app provides schedules, alerts and forecasts for power outages. Eskom, the state power monopoly, is struggling to generate enough electricity to meet needs, and has re-introduced a byzantine system of rotating outages known as “load-shedding.” On February 11th a whopping 4,000 megawatts of power, enough to power some 3m households, was cut from the national grid to prevent it from collapsing. Some businesses have bought generators and battery systems; others close during outages. In big cities, there is chaos at rush hour as traffic lights go dark. The blackouts suit copper-cable thieves, who can steal without fear of electrocution. And when the electricity is switched backed on, substations sometimes explode, resulting in secondary outages. South Africa has been here before. A spell of load-shedding in 2007-08 was caused by a shortage of the coal that is used to generate most of the country’s electricity. In 2014 more blackouts followed delays in building new plants and maintenance backlogs at old ones. The latest power cuts have been linked to poor maintenance, and to a shortage of a different fuel: diesel. This is used in expensive open-cycle gas turbines that are meant to provide electricity in emergencies, but are now being used rather more often. Two massive new coal-fired stations, Kusile and Medupi, are years behind schedule, hugely over budget and plagued by technical problems. Eskom is beset by allegations of corruption and mismanagement. The company’s troubles have their roots in the dysfunction of apartheid. South Africa’s power grid was designed to serve the white minority. After the first democratic elections in 1994, the new government, led by the African National Congress (ANC), connected poor black areas to the grid. Massive expansion was needed to meet surging demand. But stations have been dogged by accusations of contract irregularities. Eskom’s problems have been aggravated by the fact that many South Africans do not pay for their electricity. Municipalities often have outstanding payments, some individuals steal electricity through illegal connections, and others view electricity as something that the ANC should provide free of charge. The cost of electricity has duly risen, demand has now shrunk and some people have gone off grid altogether. On top of this, Eskom’s workforce is almost 50% larger than a decade ago, even though many skilled staff have responded to the drop in morale and the company’s increasing politicisation by leaving. The result of all this chaos is a debt crisis. Eskom owes R419bn ($29.5bn), a debt it is unable to service. Government officials say it is technically insolvent. On February 20th the finance minister announced a partial bailout worth R69bn over the next three years, but said the government would not be taking on Eskom’s debt. Reform efforts have been stymied by the ANC’s left-wing partners. When Cyril Ramaphosa announced plans to split Eskom into three parts—generation, transmission and distribution—to make it more transparent and efficient, trade unions led protests against the potential job losses. Ahead of elections on May 8th, the president will be wary of angering unions further. Perhaps the only upside of Eskom’s troubles is that South Africans are increasingly looking to renewable energy sources for cheaper, more reliable electricity.