OUT WEST, libertarian-minded politicians sing paeans to local control and the superior judgment of the common man over pointy-headed experts. The idea that sensible policy might sometimes emanate from Washington, DC is frowned upon. But these sensibilities only go so far. In November 2018, voters in deeply Republican Idaho, Nebraska and Utah all voted for ballot initiatives to expand eligibility for Medicaid, the government health-insurance programme for the very poor. Now that it is time to act on the people’s will, however, Republican officials are trying to hinder it. Republicans still loathe the Affordable Care Act (ACA), better known as Obamacare. A large expansion of state Medicaid programmes, almost entirely paid for by the federal government, was a central pillar of the reform. But the Supreme Court declared that state participation was voluntary. Most Republican-led states at the time abstained. They have since started to relent, as the success of the campaigns to expand Medicaid in three states in which Donald Trump beat Hillary Clinton by at least 18 percentage points shows. Campaigners made both a humanitarian case for the poor residents unable to get health insurance, and a fiscal one pointing to the federal dollars left on the table. Because of a glitch in the text of the ACA, the working poor in states that did not expand Medicaid made too much to qualify for the programme but too little to purchase subsidised policies on state health-insurance exchanges. The result was a woefully high population of uninsured in those states that opted out. In Utah, state senators are pushing through a bill that would only partially expand Medicaid. It would also institute work requirements and institute caps on enrolment, which were not part of the ballot measure. The professed reason for this revision is fiscal discipline. Yet the bill was initially estimated to cost $72m over the next two years—about seven times more than a clean, full expansion. That was later revised down to $49m for reasons that are unclear. State lawmakers say they would eventually save costs by asking the federal government to provide the higher match after all—something that has never happened. To cajole the regulators, the bill also includes a time-bomb. If the waiver is not granted within 18 months, the entire Medicaid expansion would be ripped up. Nonetheless, Gary Herbert, the Republican governor, is expected to sign the rollback as soon as it reaches his desk. There have been grumblings in Idaho, too, though these seem unlikely to prove fatal to expansion. On February 5th, the state’s Supreme Court rejected a lawsuit by the Idaho Freedom Foundation, a libertarian group, seeking to block it. Though Brad Little, the newly elected governor, is a Republican, he campaigned on accepting the result of the ballot measure and does not appear to be planning to derail it. He is said to be contemplating adding work requirements, however. The state is expected to submit its detailed plan in the next two weeks. Lawmakers in Nebraska have not announced plans to revise the expansion; but nor do they seem in much of a rush to enact it. Republican antipathy for direct democracy has precedent. Voters in Maine approved a binding Medicaid expansion via ballot measure in 2017. Paul LePage, the Republican governor, flatly refused it, rejecting spending bills sent to him by the state legislature. “I will go to jail before I put the state in red ink,” he said at the time. “And if the court tells me I have to do it, then we’re going to be in jail.” It did not go that far. And this year will be quite different: Maine has elected a new governor—a Democrat—who is proceeding with the expansion.