“BRAVERY”, MARIE COLVIN once said, “is not being afraid to be afraid.” The war correspondent had enough experience of those states to express this gnomic utterance without fear of contradiction or derision. Born in Oyster Bay, Long Island, and educated at Yale, Colvin made her name covering conflicts in Afghanistan, Libya, Iraq and Syria for the Sunday Times. After losing her eye in a rocket-propelled grenade attack in Sri Lanka in 2001, she wore a black eye patch, which she said made her look like a pirate. Behind the jokes and the glamorous image she cultivated, however, was a struggle with PTSD and alcoholism. Colvin was fiercely ambitious, cared deeply about the work she was doing and the actions she believed her words could spur. Because of that, she could also be reckless in pursuit of a story. She died in Homs, Syria, in 2012, one of the very last Western journalists in the city. Evidence suggests that she may have been targeted in retaliation for her coverage of the conflict. On January 31st a federal judge in Washington, DC, ruled that the Syrian government was liable for her death, ordering Bashar Assad’s regime to pay $302.5m in damages. Rosamund Pike, the British actress who plays the journalist in “A Private War”, studied clips of Colvin’s voice and accent when preparing for another role and was increasingly drawn to Colvin herself. This led her to track down Matthew Heineman, the director of documentaries “Cartel Land” and “City of Ghosts”, who she heard was making a film about the late reporter. Whether consciously or not, the reasons she gives for landing the role are Colvin-esque. “He wanted a partner who would dig in with him,” she says. Over many months they interviewed Colvin’s friends, colleagues and family, seeking their blessing and teasing out their memories to augment the film’s original source material, an article in Vanity Fair by Marie Brenner. Paul Conroy (played in the film by Jamie Dornan), a photographer who worked closely with Colvin and was with her at the time of her death, eventually agreed to be a consultant. “A Private War” zig-zags through the final decade of Colvin’s life. One scene depicts her desperation to cover an unreported humanitarian crisis in Sri Lanka—this was the trip that cost her an eye. Later, she struggles to find stability and recognition in her job at the Sunday Times in London. Rows with her ex-husband; struggles with body image (she was a fierce dieter); a steely interview with Muammar Qaddafi; the discovery of a mass grave in Iraq; trauma-induced hallucinations; the fateful meeting with Mr Conroy: through all this, the camera does not flinch. Ms Pike says that there is an “awkward conflict” in all war reporters’ lives. They travel to some of the most devastated and devastating places in the world, but—unlike those whose stories they tell—they can return home. It “pushed [Colvin] to stay longer and go further. She talked a hard game about having red lines you didn’t cross, but she crossed hers all the time.” The film is excellent at exploring the conflicting feelings Colvin had for her profession. “I hate being in a warzone”, Ms Pike says in the film, “but I feel compelled—compelled—to see it for myself.” “A Private War” seeks to do justice to Colvin’s story as well as those of the civilians she met. According to Ms Pike, Mr Heineman made a point—unusual for a director—of interviewing each member of the background cast himself. Many had been involved in the carnage being depicted. In one of the final scenes, a man grieves for his dead son in a makeshift clinic in Homs, staffed only by a veterinarian and devoid of all but the most rudimentary supplies. The actor had lost a nephew to sniper fire in Homs. The boy had been on his shoulders when the bullet struck. “When his real grief erupted during filming,” says Ms Pike, “I didn’t know where to put my own feelings. I wondered if what we were doing was okay. If it was right.” If one thing has been lost in this earnest pursuit to create what Mr Heineman has called “a love letter to journalism and an homage to Marie”, it is Colvin’s famous sense of fun. There are comic touches, but they serve to foreshadow what is to come. “This isn’t a bra, this is La Perla. If anyone is going to pull my corpse from a trench, I want them to be impressed.” And: “This is the last time,” she says in the basement of a bombed-out building hours before her death, that “I book a fucking vacation on the internet.” But “A Private War” is convincing in its belief that Colvin possessed a unique type of courage, one that encompassed horror, fear, a stubborn conviction and an intense humanity. This, too, is what sticks with Ms Pike. “The more you find out, the more you see the humanness, vulnerabilities and the cost of what she did, as well as the bravery.” “A Private War” is released in British cinemas on February 15th. Read more: “The life and death of a courageous war reporter”