JOAQUÍN GUZMÁN LOERA is a Mexican drug lord known as El Chapo (“Shorty”) whose long and bloody reign as boss of the Sinaloa gang has led to thousands of deaths in his home country. When Mexican authorities caught him for the third time in 2016, after he had escaped from prison twice, they extradited him to the United States. The man American authorities call “the most notorious drug trafficker in the world” is being tried in a New York court on charges related to running a criminal enterprise and could spend the rest of his life in an American prison if convicted. What is extradition? Agreements between rulers to exchange fugitives go back at least to Biblical times, although they primarily concerned political enemies rather than common criminals. The Treaty of Peace between Ramses II, Pharaoh of Egypt, and Hattusili III, a Hittite king, is recorded in hieroglyphics and is thought to be one of the first diplomatic documents to lay out such reciprocal exchange. French diplomats modernised extradition treaties with a flurry of conventions between rulers in the Middle Ages. In 1376 Charles V of France and the Count of Savoy agreed to give each other “malefactors promptly upon the first request”. By the 1700s such agreements had become widespread and, though political enemies remained on the hit list, the emphasis shifted to people thought guilty of murder, rape, assault and other crimes. Under the Jay Treaty of 1794, America and Britain agreed to deliver to each other persons charged with murder or forgery. Today extradition is still largely done under bilateral treaties. America has more than 100 such deals and is party to several multilateral agreements that could serve as a basis of extradition, such as the International Convention for the Suppression of Counterfeiting Currency. The treaties spell out which crimes are covered (military or political crimes are generally excluded today), the steps each country will take, and the criteria that must be fulfilled. For example, under the terms of Canada’s extradition agreement with the United States, the crime with which the supposed criminal is to be charged in the US must also be a crime in Canada. The problem, at least for the requesting state, is that extraditions are not fool-proof or fast. Governments can refuse to comply, as Hong Kong did last year at the urging of the Chinese government when it turned down an American request for the extradition of Iat Hong on charges of hacking the computers of two American law firms and trading on the information. Those facing extradition can evade arrest. Julian Assange, of WikiLeaks fame, has been at the Ecuadorean embassy in London since 2012. He claimed asylum there after Sweden issued an international arrest warrant following allegations of rape and sexual assault, and also feared onward extradition to the United States in relation to the leaking of diplomatic cables. (The Swedish investigation has now been dropped—and Mr Assange denies the allegations of assault—but he still risks arrest by the British for breaching the conditions of his bail.) And those with deep pockets and good lawyers can launch legal battles that drag on for years. Rakesh Saxena, an Indian citizen, fought extradition to Thailand from Canada for 13 years. All of which suggests we will not soon see the end of another extradition story in the news, that of Meng Wanzhou of Huawei. She is under house arrest in Vancouver while Canadian authorities consider an American request to hand her over to face trial on fraud charges linked to American sanctions against Iran.