EBIZO ICHIKAWA was three years old when his father asked him if he wanted to be on the stage. It wasn’t really a question. His father was Danjuro Ichikawa XII, the head of an acting clan that has dominated kabuki theatre in Japan since the 17th century; boys in the family are taught from birth to keep up the tradition. Before he even began school, Ebizo (which is a stage name: his given name is Takatoshi Horikoshi. Danjuro is a bestowed title) knew that he would one day become Danjuro Ichikawa XIII, a thespian aristocrat. “I said yes,” he recalls, smiling. Now aged 41, his time has come. Danjuro Ichikawa XII, as famous in Japan as Laurence Olivier once was in Britain, died from pneumonia in 2013, aged 66 (some fans believe the strain of kabuki acting shortens the lives of its greatest performers). Ebizo announced his succession in January, and will be inaugurated at an official ceremony next year. Standing shyly by his side at the Kabukiza Theatre in Tokyo was his five-year-old son, Shinnosuke Ichikawa VIII (real name Kangen Horikoshi), who in turn will inherit the Danjuro title. Little Shinnosuke made his first stage appearance when he was two years old. “Tradition dictates that boys are supposed to start training aged six years, six months and six days but that’s now considered too late,” Ebizo explains. Kabuki is a blend of singing, dancing and acting, and performers must be proficient in all three; its roots lie in a bawdy, rebellious musical theatre once performed by women. The rough acting style pioneered by the first Danjuro (who was stabbed to death on stage in 1704) is particularly demanding, full of melodrama, sword swinging and grandiose gestures. In some plays, Ebizo performs ten separate parts, both male and female; roles include gravediggers, peddlers and prostitutes as well as samurai and daimyo (lords). Some plays require wigs and thick makeup, and costumes weighing up to 50 kilogrammes. Shows run for weeks without a break. It is not for the undertrained, “or the weak”, Ebizo says. He is familiar with tragedy as well as drama, losing his young wife, a television host, to breast cancer in 2017. Ebizo says he still finds it hard to discuss her death. In 2010 he outraged kabuki’s conservative guardians with a drunken punch-up in a Tokyo nightclub that might have ended his career. His televised mea culpa attracted a 700-strong scrum of reporters and photographers, many of whom had come to see if the brawl had damaged his ability to perform the famous Danjuro cross-eyed nirami (glare), which he has to project to the back of performance halls (it had survived the fight intact). Kabuki was pickled in tradition long before UNESCO designated it a “Masterpiece of the Oral and Intangible Heritage of Humanity” in 2005. “I look out at my audiences and see them getting older,” laments Ebizo. His task is to find a way to hold onto this ageing core while enticing a new generation more familiar with smartphones than “Shibaraku” (a play in the kabuki repertoire). He uses social media to tackle this challenge, sending regular dispatches to his 1.4m Instagram followers. His Facebook page is adorned with photos of his son and daughter clowning around, a window into a life once shrouded in secrecy. Like Olivier, Ebizo has also lent his talents to television and film in the hope of increasing kabuki’s profile. He won a Best Actor award at the Japanese equivalent of the Oscars five years ago for his role in the movie “Ask This of Rikyu”, in which he starred with his late father. He has taken kabuki abroad, performing in London, Paris and New York, of which there will be more to come, he promises. Ebizo says he briefly squirmed under the weight of expectation in his teenage years. (“It was a typical adolescent rebellion: ‘Why do I have to do this?’”) Now he must guide his own offspring through the gruelling apprenticeship and the challenges the artform faces. His son is more sure-footed than he was, he says, though being born into the Ichikawa family is no guarantee of success. Even so, Ebizo reckons that having your life and career mapped out early has its advantages. “I learned to look at this as my destiny,” he says.