TYSON TIMBS, a man from Indiana, had his $42,000 Land Rover seized in 2015 after he pleaded guilty to selling $385 worth of heroin to undercover police. The confiscation seemed unreasonable to the small-time drug dealer, so Mr Timbs sued, arguing that the Eighth Amendment’s bar on “excessive fines” protected him from having so much of his property grabbed by authorities. The justices heard Mr Timbs's case in November, putting civil-asset forfeiture—a widespread and widely reviled practice whereby police take control of property that was used in a suspected crime—under scrutiny. But until February 20th, the constitutional protection against excessive fines applied only when the federal government tried to take too much from the accused. With the Supreme Court’s 9-0 decision in Timbs v Indiana, states and localities are now on notice that they are constrained as well. Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg (pictured) wrote for a unanimous court in Timbs, finding that the constitution protects people accused of crimes from having outlandish sums seized by city or state authorities. In the language of the law, the excessive-fines clause is now “incorporated” against the states, as are nearly all of the other protections in the Bill of Rights. As Justice Ginsburg explained, with only a few exceptions, the Supreme Court “has held that the Fourteenth Amendment’s due-process clause incorporates the protections contained in the Bill of Rights, rendering them applicable to the states”. A right qualifies for incorporation “if it is ‘fundamental to our scheme of ordered liberty’, or ‘deeply rooted in this nation’s history and tradition’. This led the majority opinion to dive into the historical context of the clause, tracing “its venerable lineage back to at least 1215, when Magna Carta guaranteed that “[a] Free-man shall not be amerced for a small fault, but after the manner of the fault; and for a great fault after the greatness thereof, saving to him his contenement”. The Magna Carta limited fines to levies that are “proportioned to the wrong”, Justice Ginsburg wrote, and “not be so large as to deprive [an offender] of his livelihood”. This principle did not put a halt to abuse. “The 17th century Stuart kings, in particular, were criticised for using large fines to raise revenue, harass their political foes, and indefinitely detain those unable to pay”. A similar pattern is to be found “across the Atlantic”, Justice Ginsburg wrote, where the founders added the protection against excessive fines to the Bill of Rights but authorities remained greedy. At America’s founding, eight states representing 70% of the population banned excessive fines in their constitutions. By 1868, when the Fourteenth Amendment was adopted, 35 of 37 states did. But “abuses continued”, the court’s ruling notes, this time to exert control over newly freed slaves and “maintain the prewar racial hierarchy” by imposing “draconian fines” for ill-defined crimes like vagrancy. Using the power of the state to impose systems of inequality is no relic, as an amicus brief from the National Association for the Advancement of Coloured People (NAACP), America's oldest civil-rights outfit, explained. Today, 10m Americans owe “more than $50bn from contact with the criminal justice system”. The burden is not evenly shared. “State and local governments are disparately imposing these fines against black Americans and other people of colour”, the brief noted, citing a report published in 2017 by the US Commission on Civil Rights. Places that raise revenue through fines are often home to a “larger percentage of African Americans and Latinos relative to the demographics of the median municipality”. An example is Ferguson, Missouri, where in 2015 the Department of Justice found the city was “maximising revenue” on the backs of its poor African-American residents. In November, the oral argument offered clear signs that the Supreme Court was ready to expand protections against excessive fines to the states. At one point, Justice Neil Gorsuch became exasperated with Indiana’s defence of its treatment of Mr Timbs. It is 2018, he told the state’s lawyer. Are we really “still litigating incorporation of the Bill of Rights”? (“Come on”, he added.) It was no surprise, then, when the court ruled 9-0 in Timbs. Still, the atmosphere of agreeableness in which the justices have released their first bundle of rulings—nine of 10 have been unanimous—came with a hint of division. In a concurring opinion, Justice Clarence Thomas explained why he preferred the privileges-or-immunities clause of the 14th amendment as the vehicle for incorporating rights against the states. When the court has used “due process” to “fashion fundamental rights without any textual constraints”, he wrote, justices have arrived at “some of the court’s most notoriously incorrect decisions”. He cited two examples: Dred Scott v Sandford, stripping black Americans of citizenship, and Roe v Wade, the 1973 ruling recognising the right to abortion.