“AIR TRAVEL is both the most advanced form of transportation and the most boring,” David Flexer, president of Inflight Motion Pictures, told the New Yorker in 1962. Mr Flexer had just spent years developing the technology to bring in-flight movies to Trans World Airlines, which in 1961 became the first carrier to offer regular on-board films. This wasn’t exactly the debut of sky-high flicks—that came 40 years earlier, when Aeromarine Airlines showed “Howdy Chicago!” to 11 passengers on a leisurely flight circling above the Windy City—but it marked the start of an explosion of in-flight entertainment. Drop-down screens every few rows soon became common. Then seatback screens took over, allowing passengers to choose for themselves what to watch. But the expansion of in-flight entertainment was expensive. Individual screens cost as much as $10,000 per seat to install and require regular repairs, and their weight increases fuel costs. Airlines also have to spend millions of dollars a year on film licences. With ever more passengers bringing personal entertainment devices on board, some airlines began cutting back. In recent years, United Airlines, American Airlines and Hawaiian Airlines all opted to go without seatback screens on some of their new planes. Bloomberg News duly reported in 2017 that “Your in-flight movie screen is going extinct.” It seemed that flyers without personal gadgets might once again find air travel as anodyne as Mr Flexer described. But the decline of in-flight entertainment may already be over. An arms race, it seems, has broken out among America’s major airlines. And for once, it isn’t over who can cut the most costs or squeeze the most fees out of flyers. It’s over who can provide the best entertainment. United Airlines announced last month that it was going to start offering free live television, replacing a paid service, on 211 of its planes. On the same day American Airlines—which already provides free live television on some of its flights—trumped its rival by announcing that it would provide free access to Apple Music streaming for all passengers with personal devices. Two months earlier Southwest Airlines had started offering free movies for passengers to stream on their personal devices. Delta Air Lines, meanwhile, is bingeing on seatback entertainment. Last year it had more planes with seatback screens than any other carrier. And Alaska Airlines has become the first American carrier to offer virtual-reality headsets on a trial basis, following similar moves from European airlines. What’s going on here? With fuel and labour costs beginning to rise, and passenger numbers likely to fall, airlines are starting to worry about how to stand out in an increasingly competitive business environment. “When one guy starts competing on quality, another guy competes and soon everyone has it,” Jan K. Brueckner, an economics professor at the University of California-Irvine, told the Los Angeles Times. Flying these days may be trying in a number of ways, but at least it might be getting a little less boring.