SINCE 2015 Gatwick Detainees Welfare Group, a charity, has organised a storytelling walk inspired by “The Canterbury Tales”. The accounts in Geoffrey Chaucer’s poem, as narrated by fictional pilgrims walking from London to Canterbury, provided some insight into the customs and injustices of 14th-century English society; Refugee Tales does the same for 21st-century Britain. It focuses on the experiences of asylum-seekers who have been held at Brook House and Tinsley House, detention centres in Kent, and the cruelty and inefficiency of the country’s immigration system. The fifth edition of the event took place earlier this month, and it brought together 150 volunteers and refugees on a five-day, 60-mile journey from Brighton to Hastings. By day they walked and talked; each night they stopped in a different town to stage a performance. Local audiences were invited to listen to readings of stories such as “The Fisherman’s Tale”, written by Ian Samson, based on the testimony of an unnamed Iraqi man who fled his family farm after Islamic State fighters kidnapped his brothers. (To protect the participants’ identities, they are often paired with professional writers who tell the story on their behalf.) He ended up in Norway, where he taught himself to fish, and eventually in Britain, where he was held in a detention centre. “You are not really going to listen. No one listens,” it begins. “You are not really going to hear. No one hears. You are not really going to care. No one cares. But I will tell you my story anyway.”  In Lewes an audience gathered to listen to David Constantine, a British writer, poet and translator, read “The Orphan’s Tale”, about a man who was granted asylum in Britain as a child after fleeing the civil war in Sierra Leone. By the age of 17, he had a job and a serious girlfriend, whose daughter he was helping to bring up, and he was due to start studying engineering at university. Then he turned 18 and lost his right to remain in the country overnight. His story limns years of suffering and uncertainty, and lambasts the arbitrariness of the system. Britain is the only European country with no maximum time limit on immigration detention. Individuals are locked up for months, even years, in prison-like conditions. But Refugee Tales has an artistic as well as a political purpose. Chaucer’s poem “establishes an original link between journeying, human movement, storytelling and poetry and we were wanting to recover that and—at this moment of hostility towards human movement—remind people that great works of imagination, and great acts of storytelling and of sharing, come out of travelling,” David Herd, a poet, writer and an organiser of the event, says. It also restores some dignity to those affected. “People in detention wanted their stories heard,” Anna Pincus, the director of Gatwick Detainees Welfare Group and the founder and coordinator of Refugee Tales, says. “They felt invisible.” The tales are collected in volumes published by Comma Press; the latest book was launched in Hastings on the final night of the walk. In the new work, six of the 19 former detainees featured have chosen to tell their stories in their own words for the first time. Their writing humanises a crisis often rendered in statistics. “Everyone is full of pages, every part of our body is a different chapter. We are all just walking novels,” writes the author of “The Foster Child’s Tale”, who grew up on the streets of an unnamed country after fleeing an abusive guardian. With the help of a local charity, he came to Britain to study, but after his sponsor committed suicide, he was detained for three months in four different centres. Few will be aware of the scale of the problem. In 2018 24,748 people were subjected to indefinite detention in the UK. Liberty, a charity, estimates that the government spends an average of £76m ($94m) of taxpayer money each year on the long-term detention of people who are eventually released. Those who are not deported remain in the country in limbo. While awaiting “indefinite leave to remain”, a status that confers the right to stay, a process that can take up to a decade, these individuals are refused the right to work and are expected to live on £35 a week, a stipend paid in vouchers that cannot be used on public transport. This often forces people to walk for miles to check in at reporting centres on a weekly or monthly basis. Many are left homeless; most live in constant fear of being locked up again. Refugee Tales harnesses the power of storytelling to foster empathy. Ms Pincus says the books have helped to convince dozens of MPs to back an amendment to an immigration bill, proposed in February, that would limit detention to a maximum of 28 days. Asylum-seekers may feel that no one listens, no one hears and no one cares about their stories; but Refugee Tales suggests otherwise.