THE NEW wave of high-class horror rolls on with “Midsommar”, a sinister, slow-burning film by Ari Aster, which is being hailed by many critics as one of the best of the year. Following the director’s acclaimed debut, “Hereditary”, Jordan Peele’s “Get Out” and “Us”, John Krasinski’s “A Quiet Place” and Luca Guadagnino’s “Suspiria”, “Midsommar” is a horror movie with crossover potential. It has the resonant themes, painstaking cinematography and Oscar-worthy acting to pull in viewers in the mood for a prestigious drama; but it will also appeal to those who just fancy seeing close-ups of good-looking youngsters being mutilated. The film’s star, Florence Pugh, is especially impressive. A British actress best known for indie dramas (“The Falling”, “Lady Macbeth”), Ms Pugh is as expressive when she is glaring silently as when she is collapsing in a fit of racking sobs. The reason for these sobs is that the sister and parents of her character, Dani, are killed in the film’s opening minutes: like “Hereditary”, “Midsommar” explores grief. Dani’s passive-aggressive dolt of a boyfriend Christian (Jack Reynor) isn’t much help, and he blames her for his neglectful behaviour as well as for her own woes.  Before the deaths, Christian had been planning to break up with Dani but, more out of cowardice than compassion, he decides in the circumstances to let her tag along on his boys’ holiday to northern Sweden. His American graduate-student buddies (Will Poulter and William Jackson Harper) are not too pleased, but his Swedish friend Pelle (Vilhelm Blomgren) reassures Dani that she is more than welcome. He has invited them all to a nine-day solstice festival in the woodland commune where he grew up, and he seems suspiciously sure that Dani will fit right in. On arrival, she agrees. The ancient rites and the perpetual sunshine in Pelle’s remote enclave may be disorientating, but the white-robed tribespeople are warm and beatific, and the psychotropic mushrooms they hand out turn the meadows into rippling oceans of wild flowers. It is quite a while before Dani learns how much trouble she is in. Too long, perhaps. As anyone who has seen Robin Hardy’s British cult classic “The Wickerman” (1973) will know, things never end well for outsiders who poke their noses into an isolated community’s pagan festivities—sex and ritual sacrifice are usually involved—and “Midsommar” comes to much the same conclusion as that film, or indeed any other folk-horror mystery. The difference is that it takes 140 minutes to get there. Not that Mr Aster wastes the time. A lot funnier than “Hereditary”, “Midsommar” is in part a cheerful comedy about bickering Americans who are befuddled by the customs and cuisine of a foreign country. The screenplay floats some provocative ideas about the sense of belonging offered by religions, however anachronistic and illogical they may appear. There are so many odd little details scattered throughout the gorgeously designed film that it never stops being intriguing. The runic inscriptions and the pictographs on the barn walls are all very well, but why is there a live bear locked in a wooden cage? Yet as well-crafted as “Midsommar” is, viewers still have to wait an hour before anything unpleasant happens in the commune. When it does happen, it is so unpleasant that it is hard to believe that Dani and the others would not run for the hills, instead of shrugging and going along with the programme of solemn al fresco meals and exhausting maypole dances devised by their hosts. Many viewers will go along with it, too, though others will feel that Mr Aster is cheating. Given that two of his characters are anthropology students who ask the commune’s elders about their myths and traditions, they seem oddly incurious about the more brutal practices. Nor do they seem to care that their friends keep disappearing without trace, or that there is a locked-up bear in the vicinity. The careless plotting means that “Midsommar” is ultimately more frustrating than frightening. It gives viewers plenty of time to appreciate its myriad artistic touches, but also to notice how ridiculously implausible it is. “Midsommar” is screening in Britain and America now