A COUPLE of years ago, friends and acquaintances of James Johnston noticed a change in his social-media activity. Mr Johnston is a highly accomplished multi-instrumentalist who, in addition to leading his own band, Gallon Drunk, since 1988, has been a key collaborator or performer with Nick Cave & The Bad Seeds, PJ Harvey, Faust and Lydia Lunch. Mr Johnston customarily used his Facebook account to relay information about his touring schedule: where he would be playing, and who with. He had started posting images of paintings. At first it was paintings he had seen in whichever museum or gallery he had taken the chance to visit in that day’s city, as is his habit. Then it was paintings he had created himself. The remarkable thing was that, without Mr Johnston’s captions, it would be unclear which was which. There is a long tradition of would-be artists making a success of pop music, but the reverse is rare. Plenty of musicians dabble in visual art but few produce anything of great merit: if their work gains attention, it is chiefly because of their celebrity. Mr Johnston is not a celebrity—though he is admired by many followers of alternative rock—and it was immediately apparent that his work was of a different order. He has a remarkable gift for loose, raw, figurative painting, often infused with macabre humour and arresting colour, which straightaway imprints itself upon the viewer’s imagination.  He discovered this gift, if not inadvertently, then through force of circumstance. Popular fancy may depict the life of a touring rock musician as a whirlwind of orgiastic intoxication, but it tends towards the mundane and businesslike, and it involves a lot of downtime in hotel rooms. Mr Johnston was on a two-year tour with PJ Harvey in 2016 and 2017, when, by his own account, “I was challenged to do a picture a day after a conversation in an airport about drawing, basically to alleviate boredom in hotels, but also just to see if I could do it. I started painting small-scale in my hotel room every morning, and very soon realised that it was exactly the sort of escape I’d needed; it felt fresh, and I became lost in it very quickly.” Some of these small pictures can be seen in Mr Johnston’s first solo exhibition at the Stash Gallery in London. They are varied and vivid things, showing an artist quickly finding his feet. “Dancers at the Black Eagle” has a light, fleshy eroticism, while the scrawled black lines of “Mardi Gras” pick out a sinister trio. These compact works hang alongside 30 much larger paintings from the recent studio practice to which Mr Johnston has devoted eight hours a day, and the juxtaposition reveals he has maintained the discipline required for those first hotel-bound works. The controlled palette of each picture contrasts with the exuberance of texture and brushstrokes—which, for all their wildness, always seem to land exactly where they need to. That instinct is important. Mr Johnston had not painted since leaving high school, and has had no formal art training since. But it would be a mistake to see him an outsider artist. He is interested in and informed about fine art, and has long associated with visual artists. His work betrays his influences—such as Edvard Munch’s haunted faces, Weimar-era expressionist grotesquerie and the anthropomorphic dogs of Keith Haring—but never pastiches them. The paintings that hang in this exhibition would not have looked out of place in the Nazis’ notorious collection of “degenerate art”, nor would they have been found wanting in their proximity to so many modernist greats. Mr Johnston’s creations are for the most part discomfiting, funny and idiosyncratic. They are often populated by eerie masked or skull-headed figures (human, beast or both), looming from what might be fire, fog or thick black smoke. “Figure in Water”, the exhibition’s main image, depicts a seemingly male figure surrounded by darkness, its lower half submerged in delicate malachite-coloured ripples, its upper half incandescent white, as if composed of burning magnesium. That one of the most striking new painters should have begun his career as a 50-something hobbyist already established in another artistic field is an unexpected development, not least for Mr Johnston. He initially took up painting for no reason other than to paint. The purity and pleasure of that urge are evident on every canvas. “James Johnston: New Works” continues at the Stash Gallery in London until August 24th