LISTEN TO yacht rock, and an image starts to form in your mind: one of ocean views from California’s Highway 1, cold beers and blood-orange sunsets. The sound is smooth, with a soft bassline and minimal drums, and it combines elements of funk, jazz and R’n’B. The piano carries the melody, but often gives way to gentle guitar or saxophone solos. The songs’ lyrics might explore what it means to live a carefree life, but melancholic themes recur, too—particularly yearning or foolish love. The subgenre was born in Los Angeles and San Francisco in the early 1970s. Many of those who had protested against war and preached free love in the decade before had grown up, settled down and bought homes and cars. Songwriters found a home for their gently catchy tunes on radio stations that were aimed at the drivetime listener. Seals and Crofts’s appealing “Summer Breeze” (1972) was an early hit, soon followed by Steely Dan’s “Reelin’ in the Years”. The Doobie Brothers (pictured) dominated the airwaves with their more upbeat, finger-tapping rhythms, known as the “Doobie Bounce”, in songs such as “It Keeps You Runnin” (1976) and the Grammy award-winning “What a Fool Believes” (1979). Toto perfected the artform in “Africa”, which reached the number one spot on America’s Billboard Hot 100 chart in 1983, and in “Rosanna”.  But listeners soon tired of the music’s earnestness. MTV had launched in 1981 and was keenly promoting New Wave music, which relied heavily on electronic sounds and disco influences. Compared with Duran Duran’s “Rio”, Hall and Oates’s “I Can’t Go For That” lacked boldness and urgency. Other music fans had turned to the grittier and less aspirational tunes provided by alternative-rock bands such as R.E.M.. Yacht rock came to be dismissed as schmaltzy and uncool, consigned to wedding parties and dusty record collections. Now it has come back into fashion again. An online series, released in 2005, dramatised the careers of American “soft rock” stars and coined the term “yacht rock”. An official playlist on Spotify has hundreds of thousands of followers. Toto’s “Africa” enjoys enormous popularity: it has been played nearly 600m times on the music-streaming service; its video, first released in 1983, has been watched more than 500m times on YouTube. Google searches for “yacht rock” have steadily climbed since the early 2010s (see chart), with spikes in traffic in the summer months. “I Can Go For That: The Smooth World of Yacht Rock”, a two-part documentary, was broadcast on the BBC in June. With this renewed attention has come some debate over what qualifies as yacht rock. The Spotify playlist features artists such as George Michael, Billy Joel and Fleetwood Mac alongside Journey, Foreigner and Kenny Loggins. The term “roughly corrals music that shares a DNA”, says Katie Puckrik, the host of “I Can Go For That”. It is not “groundbreaking, manifesto-making music”, she says, but “a mellow, easy, teflon-covered sound”. That DNA is evident in the work of modern hitmakers: listen to “Fragments of Time” by Daft Punk, “Fun, Fun, Fun” by Pharrell Williams (a self-confessed Steely Dan fan) and “White Sky” by Vampire Weekend and you will find the same light melodies. “Late Night Feelings”, Mark Ronson’s recent album, brings modern production techniques to bear on the same retro sound. Thundercat took his tribute to the era even further, featuring vocals from Michael McDonald and Kenny Loggins on his song “Show You The Way”. People may be tuning in to yacht rock now for the same reason they did in the 1970s and early ’80s. Back then the music provided a blissful escape from the news of the Watergate scandal, the bloody end of the Vietnam war, the energy crisis and economic stagnation. It lifted you out of your car or your office, and transported you to sunny California. “A sign of the times is what ends up being mainstream music,” Ms Puckrik says. “Because there was so much upheaval and dissatisfaction, it was the perfect time for this music to flourish.” The presidential scandals may be different, and new environmental anxieties have arisen, but the satisfaction provided by a feel-good tune remains the same.  