“I DON’T THINK that expansions just die of old age,” Janet Yellen, a former chairwoman of the Federal Reserve, told economists at a conference in Atlanta on January 4th. That theory may soon be put to the test. As of today, the economic expansion that began in America in June 2009 has continued, uninterrupted, for more than 120 months (3,654 days to be exact), making it the longest in history. The previous record, according to the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER), America’s official arbiter of recessions, was the ten-year boom that took place between 1991 and 2001. The business cycle has been getting longer for some time. Between 1945 and 1981, American economic expansions lasted for three years and eight months, on average. Since then they have stretched on for more than eight years. But as they have grown lengthier, they have become weaker, too. During the ten business cycles recorded between 1949 and 2007, the economy grew by an annual rate of 4.7% a year, on average. Since 2009, though, growth has averaged just 2.3%. What is more, GDP per person, a measure of economic growth that strips out the effects of a growing population, has inched up by just 1.5% a year. Across the previous ten cycles, it grew by an average of 3.3% a year.  There are signs the party may be coming to an end. Investment bears point to an inverted yield curve (when yields on long-term bonds fell below those on short-term ones), historically an accurate harbinger of recessions. Trade wars could also trigger a downturn. Yet professional forecasters surveyed by the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia reckon that there is just a one-in-five chance that a recession will hit next year. They still expect America’s economy to be growing by 1.7% 12 months from now. Of course, recessions are hard to predict; that is what makes them so disruptive. “As Janet says, expansions don’t die of old age,” Ben Bernanke told conference-goers in January, agreeing with his successor at the Fed. “I like to say they get murdered instead.”