FIVE candidates sit atop the crowded Democratic primary polls: Joe Biden, Bernie Sanders, Elizabeth Warren, Kamala Harris and Pete Buttigieg. In last month’s debates, a random draw made Ms Warren the sole front-runner on the first night. CNN, the host of this week’s debates, tweaked the selection process to avoid that outcome. Last night Ms Warren and Mr Sanders shared centre stage, flanked by Mr Buttigieg and Beto O’Rourke—the only other candidate polling above 2% in the average tracked by RealClearPolitics, a polling aggregator—and six other candidates fighting for their political lives ahead of the stricter qualifying thresholds for the next round of debates in September. Each of that sextet needed a breakout moment to remain alive. None quite had one. John Delaney, a former congressman from Maryland, got an inordinate amount of speaking time for someone polling at 1%, but his only notable moment was when Ms Warren, annoyed at his habit of trimming other politicians’ sails, spat, “I don’t understand why anybody goes to all the trouble of running for president of the United States to talk about what we really can’t do, and shouldn’t fight for.” Tim Ryan, a congressman from Ohio, admonished Mr Sanders for yelling, perhaps not realising that the senator from Vermont only has one volume setting.  Steve Bullock, a popular Democratic governor of deep-red Montana, made a bid for the moderate lane should Mr Biden falter, though for someone with a strong CV, and who generated a fair amount of buzz in DC before his entry, he seemed oddly unfocused and underprepared. Marianne Williamson won the night’s biggest round of applause when she told the Michigan crowd that “what happened in Flint would not have happened in Grosse Pointe,” a wealthy white suburb of Detroit. She spoke with admirable candour about race, but her inexperience, unplaceable accent and general otherworldliness make her the longest of shots to appear on stage in September. Mr O’Rourke, Amy Klobuchar, a moderate senator from Minnesota running as a pragmatist who can win in the heartland, and even Mr Buttigieg turned in relatively forgettable performances. None embarrassed themselves, but neither did they stand out. Instead, Mr Sanders and Ms Warren set the night’s pace. They did not, as some had expected, fight each other for primacy in the far-left lane. Instead, they turned in a congenial double-act that implicitly challenged Mr Biden and the party’s moderate wing. Mr Bullock derided their “wish-list economics”, but neither backed down from their ambitious plans. During a long, refreshingly substantive discussion of health-care policy, Mr Sanders held fast, blaming “the profiteering of the drug companies and insurance companies” for America’s health-care woes. Ms Warren similarly derided insurance companies, and derided politicians who offered “small ideas and spinelessness”. At times their rhetoric hardened into a sort of Trumpism for the left, with rapacious corporations, corrupt politicians and cowed regulators standing in for illegal immigrants and feckless liberals as the cause of all of America’s problems. Neither explained precisely how they would implement their plans—particularly if Democrats fail to capture the Senate—or over what period of time. A gradual roll-out of Medicare-for-All, for instance, would probably look fairly similar in practice to Mr Buttigieg’s more moderate, Medicare-for-All-Who-Want-It plan, at least for the next few decades. In that sense, Medicare-for-All may prove to be a “build the wall” for the left—less a concrete policy aim that voters expect to see completed than a flag planted to signify a direction and an ambition. While Messrs Ryan and Bullock expressed concern, both practical and electoral, with Ms Warren’s desire, stated in the last debate, to decriminalise illegally crossing into America, she did not back down there either, but neither was she as clear as she should have been. Illegal entry, even if not criminal, can still be punished civilly, which would put less strain on the federal court system. This part of the discussion turned into a bit of a hash, though all the candidates agreed that Mr Trump’s family-separation policy was cruel and wrong. That will not be enough. Without explaining what they would do to secure the border, rather than just what they wouldn’t do, they leave themselves far too open to Mr Trump’s “open borders” caricature. This debate still felt like a practice round. Tomorrow night’s probably will too: the Harris-Biden show with eight spectators. This race’s real dynamic has not yet emerged, and it will not until all of the front-runners take the stage together, with fewer distractions.