THE COUNTRIES with the two biggest armies in NATO are at loggerheads once again. On July 17th the White House officially cancelled the sale of 100 F-35 stealth fighter jets to Turkey. The move came in response to Turkey’s purchase of a Russian air-and-missile defence system, known as the S-400. This comes with its own radar, command centre and missile launcher, which began arriving in Turkey on July 12th. America fears the system’s radar could be used by Russia to spy on any warplanes it sells to Turkey. Having booted Turkey out of the F-35 programme, America appears poised to impose additional sanctions. Under a law, known as CAATSA, designed to punish major arms purchases from Russia and other American adversaries, the White House can choose from a menu of measures against Turkey. These range from visa restrictions and asset freezes, which would not do significant damage to the Turkish economy, to bans on transactions with American banks, which could have a catastrophic effect. President Donald Trump has sympathised with the Turkish leader, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, in the past, and criticised the Obama administration for withholding an American defence system from Turkey. But Republican and Democratic lawmakers have called on him to apply the sanctions law. The secretary of state, Mike Pompeo, told the Washington Post earlier this month he was confident the White House would do so.  Turkey has reportedly paid about $2bn for two S-400 batteries. But the cost of the purchase is set to be much higher. Turkish companies had been involved in the production of up to 7% of the F-35’s parts. The country’s ejection from the programme will cost them $9bn in lost contracts, according to the Pentagon. Replacing Turkish components could take the Pentagon up to two years, delaying deliveries to other allies. CAATSA sanctions could affect other areas of defence co-operation and arms development, says Arda Mevlutoglu, a defence-policy expert. The resulting disruption to supply chains would force Turkey to look for weapons elsewhere, he says, and also spur its efforts to create an indigenous arms industry. Russia, which successfully used the S-400 sale to deepen Turkey’s estrangement from its NATO allies, especially America, senses more opportunities down the road. A day after the F-35 announcement, Moscow’s leading defence contractor said it was ready to provide Turkey with Russia’s Sukhoi Su-35 fighter jets as a replacement. Were Turkey to take up the offer, another row with America and NATO would be inevitable; indeed the move could place Turkey’s membership of the alliance in jeopardy. An aggravating factor is that Mr Erdogan does not place much faith in his relationship with the West. (The feeling is mutual.) To this day, the Turkish strongman appears to believe America had a hand in a bloody coup attempt against his government in 2016. “Despite our political and military pacts with the Western alliance, the greatest threats we face come from them,” Mr Erdogan told journalists on July 14th. The purchase of the Russian air defence system, he added, was “the most important deal in Turkey’s history.” He might turn out to be right.