THE FOCAL points of landscape art changed in the 1970s and 1980s. Where painters and photographers from Caspar David Friedrich to Ansel Adams had homed in on awe-inspiring, untouched vistas with mountains, valleys and lakes, a new generation of artists focused instead on grey car parks, nuclear-test sites and the vast swathes of land being cleared for suburban development. “Landscape is no longer an aesthetic refuge,” Rebecca Solnit, a writer, historian and activist, observed in 1990, “but a battleground.” That idea is dramatised in two new documentaries about mankind’s despoliation of the planet: “Earth”, directed by Nicolas Geyrhalter, and “Anthropocene: The Human Epoch” by Edward Burtynsky, Jennifer Baichwal and Nicholas de Pencier. Both films use drones to range across the globe and capture scenes of environmental degradation, including thousands of poached elephant tusks confiscated by the Kenyan government, the startlingly colourful waterways of the Atacama desert (polluted in the production of lithium), and the gleaming white caverns of the Carrara marble mine in Italy. In “Anthropocene” these devastated landscapes (pictured top and below)—shot in bold colours and majestic wide angles—have a strange and almost improper beauty. “Earth”, meanwhile, favours an approach which is both more subtle and more powerful.  “Anthropocene” is an anthology of misery, filmed by three different directors but strung together by an overarching voiceover which provides context and factual information in each new scene. By contrast, “Earth” does away with voiceover and mixes drone footage with other perspectives. The viewer is shown a giant earth-moving machine from high above, hacking away at a mountain in Hungary, followed by the man who operates it—the camera follows close behind as he walks the hundreds of metres up the vast metal contraption to his cabin. Later, enjoying a lunchtime sandwich, the worker talks of his alarm at the rapidly shrinking glaciers in the region where he goes on holiday every year. Mr Geyrhalter anchors “Earth” (pictured below) in interviews with labourers in the mining trade (something of a departure for a director who has often preferred an observational mode). An American foreman engaged in levelling a range in California expresses unease about the speed with which he and his team can destroy vast, ancient lands in a matter of months: “Do I want to tear the hills down? No!” Yet he sees no other option given the demands of the market. A worker employed at a mine in Spain, a site once exploited by the ancient Romans, muses on the rise and fall of empires, and how they always sow the seeds of their own destruction. These unexpectedly lyrical conversations make the point that climate change is as much a tale of the absurdities of human psychology, and the contradictions that it can tolerate, as it is about rainforests, oil deposits, eco-systems and emissions. These films imply that more effort should be made to probe the underlying motivations for ecological damage, be they economic, psychological or political. Neither film offers easy solutions. The spectacular approach of “Anthropocene” is unsatisfying: after surveying the various battlegrounds from high above, the viewer has no better understanding of the causes of the war, let alone how to end it. Climate devastation is portrayed almost as a catastrophe visited upon Earth by malevolent outside forces. “Earth” imparts a slim measure of hope: if environmental ruin is a human phenomenon, then it is also within humans’ power to stop it. Persuading them to care about it in the first place, however, remains a surprisingly difficult artistic challenge. “Earth” is screening in Britain now. “Anthropocene: The Human Epoch” will be released in America in September