IN 2016 Roland Fryer, an economist, published a controversial paper. Having analysed thousands of police reports from ten American cities he found that police showed racial bias in all forms of force against African-Americans, except one: the use of guns. While blacks were more likely to be tasered, hit with a baton and generally roughed up, when it came to being shot by police they were in no more danger than whites. When he did a more detailed analysis of one city, Houston in Texas, he found whites there were in more danger of being shot by a cop than blacks. Unsurprisingly, a storm of publicity followed. In recent years, police shootings of unarmed black men have sparked furious protests. Critics of Mr Fryer’s research focused on the fact that African-Americans are stopped by police more, and therefore have more interactions with them, some of which go wrong. Mr Fryer’s data, moreover, was focused on only a handful of cities.  But this week, a nationwide study was published in Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences that supports Mr Fryer’s finding. Researchers from the University of Maryland and Michigan State University studied lists of fatal shootings compiled by the Washington Post and the Guardian and contacted every police department involved in the shootings, to ask them about the race of every officer involved. The resulting database has information on the race of police officers and civilians from more than 900 fatal shootings in 2015. The researchers found that white police officers were no more likely to shoot minority citizens than non-white officers were. If anything, black police were more likely to kill black civilians, because police tend to be drawn from the communities they work in. The best predictor of the race of killed civilians, they found, was the rate of violent crime in the place they lived. In areas with high rates of violent crime by African-Americans, police were more likely to shoot dead a black person. In areas in which white people committed more crimes, police were more likely to shoot white people. Do these findings have implications for policy-makers? When white officers shoot black civilians a common response is to talk about the need to increase racial diversity in police departments. Last month in South Bend, Indiana, Eric Logan, a black man, was shot dead by Ryan O’Neill, a white police officer whose body camera was switched off. Pete Buttigieg, the city’s mayor and a candidate for the Democratic presidential nomination, responded to outrage over the killing by apologising for not having increased racial diversity on the city’s police force as much as he had hoped to. The report’s authors say that while increasing racial diversity in police departments may be positive for other reasons—it can increase trust between police departments and the communities they serve, for example—it is unlikely, by itself, to reduce racial disparity in police shootings. “This suggests that reducing fatal shootings of racial minorities by police will require policymakers, civic leaders and ordinary citizens to address factors that lead to racial differences in violent crime, such as racial disparities in wealth, employment, education and family structure,” the authors wrote.