HONDURAS HAS a little over 9m people—or at least it did. Around 2.2% of the population have been snatched by agents at America’s southern border since October. More still have slipped past; others dream of an escape. Your correspondent is writing this from Tegucigalpa, the capital, where a mood of puzzled gloom prevails among those pondering the exodus. The government, sensing a harsh verdict on its rule, prefers not to mention it. International agencies wonder why programmes to stem the flow have not worked as hoped. More jobs will fix things, the wisdom goes. But stories like that of La Flor de Copan, a cigar factory in west Honduras which saw 47 workers quit last year to join a “caravan” of northbound migrants, deflate even the arch-optimists. Does Donald Trump see what others miss? He thinks so. His presidency has been guided by the belief that preventing migration from Central America requires toughness, not compassion. Aid is a bargaining chip to be dangled, not a seed to be planted. The unhappier an end migrants meet, the less likely others are to follow. Such thinking is used to justify the separation of parents from children at the US-Mexico border, and a new rule this month that migrants who fail to seek asylum—and get rejected—in a country they pass through en route to America will not receive shelter. On July 24th a court blocked this rule, because the law states that the deportation of ineligible migrants to a third country must be “pursuant to a bilateral or multilateral agreement”. The United States’ only such deal is with Canada, through which migrants do not pass.  On July 26th Mr Trump at last got the deal he has long coveted: a safe-third country agreement with Guatemala. It allows America to deport to Guatemala any migrant who passed through Guatemala en route. In practice that is everyone except Mexicans and Guatemalans themselves (unaccompanied children are also exempt). Mexico, faced with threats from Mr Trump over tariffs, resisted pressure from American negotiators to strike such an agreement. Mexico’s government could not stomach the troubles of processing tens of thousands of migrants each month, nor the affront to national dignity of declaring its own country safe for migrants while so many citizens do not feel it is safe for them. Neither qualm seems to bother Guatemala’s president, Jimmy Morales. Against the will of virtually all of his country’s political class, he negotiated the deal in secret for weeks. Now the work begins to justify it, by insisting that Guatemala is a good place to shelter refugees. Guatemala’s murder rate last year, which has fallen by half since 2009 to 22.4 per 100,000 people, is lower than not only Mexico’s but also that of a dozen American cities. By deterring migration, the deal will end the horrible overcrowding of Central Americans housed on both sides of the US-Mexico border. Guatemala may be poor, but the right to asylum is a right to freedom from persecution, not freedom from poverty or misery. An American judge may yet rule that merely declaring Guatemala safe does not make it so. Organised crime is rife and migrants dropped there would be vulnerable to extortion and forced recruitment. The deal is also replete with practical concerns. What if smugglers start putting migrants on boats from Honduras to Belize, sidestepping Guatemala? Can America’s immigration agents, who lately have made a habit of wrongly detaining US citizens who look Latino, be trusted to distinguish between the Hondurans and Guatemalans arriving without documents? How will Guatemala’s migration service, whose eight asylum workers have approved precisely zero claims this year, deal with a sudden influx? This last problem may not materialise. That migrants already roam Central America with such ease shows how asylum papers are not the necessity in Guatemala that they are in America. Moreover, most migrants do not want to live in Guatemala. They flock to America for well-paying jobs and reunions with relatives, neither of which Guatemala offers. The probable goal, rather, is to deter. Once it becomes clear that the door to America has slammed shut, migrants will seek an outlet for their despair elsewhere. Some may head to Mexico. Others will eschew asylum and try crossing into America undetected. Mr Morales, a populist former comedian, may have entered into talks because Mr Trump’s withdrawal of aid deeply affects him. But most analysts think he wants to personally ingratiate himself to America before his term ends in January (Guatemala does not allow re-election). He may be under the impression that its gratitude will prove useful after he loses his presidential immunity, and faces possible charges for campaign-finance violations. A plan to close the deal fell apart earlier this month when Guatemala’s highest court issued a pre-emptive ruling that congress would need to approve it. Getting that approval is tricky. Mr Morales and the deal are both toxic to Guatemalan voters. Mr Trump responded by threatening to tax the remittances that America’s Guatemalan diaspora sends home, which amounted to 12% of GDP last year, and to hit members of Guatemala’s congress with sanctions. That spurred Mr Morales to try again. Congress—and two presidential candidates—must now choose between enraging either Mr Trump or the Guatemalan people, two weeks before a run-off election on August 11th. Without congress, the government may press on despite the ruling, escalating a long-festering feud with the court. Mr Trump’s obsession with tightening America’s southern border has until now seen the number of border-hoppings rise. If he can implement the deal, it would mark the death of the legal framework allowing refugees from Central America to find sanctuary legally in America. And if it fails, a ruling from the Supreme Court on July 26th ensured that Mr Trump will have a back-up plan, one which was also his plan A. The justices ruled that the president may at last spend $2.5bn of his defence department’s money to build a wall along the Mexican border.