WHEN BILLI (Awkwafina), an underemployed artist living in Brooklyn, learns that her grandmother Nai Nai (Shuzhen Zhou) has terminal cancer, she books a flight to China to join her extended family and pay her final respects. When she arrives, she is burdened with a secret: Nai Nai is not aware of her prognosis. Chinese tradition dictates that it be kept from her until her final days, the idea being that the fear of dying hastens an individual’s demise. Instead, the family has gathered together under the ruse of a wedding as Haohao (Han Chen), Billi’s cousin, has been coerced into marrying his girlfriend of only a few months. Most of Billi’s family is comfortable with the subterfuge but she resents it, arguing that Nai Nai should be allowed to make peace with her fate. She is less adept at hiding her emotions than are her relatives—when she first greets Nai Nai she struggles not to burst into tears. This emotional sensitivity is portrayed both as a distinct character trait and a symbol of cultural difference. Billi left China for America with her parents when she was six years old, and much in Changchun seems strange and alien to her. Her uncle explains that, by keeping the truth from Nai Nai, they are “bearing the emotional burden for her” and that Billi’s desire to tell her the truth is an act of selfishness, borne from a learned American individualism. Ultimately, Billi must decide which culture to honour.  Lulu Wang, who wrote and directed “The Farewell”, has drawn on an episode from her own life. The clashes between Eastern and Western values, and between older and younger generations, are sensitively drawn; instead of using these dichotomies to create friction or high drama, Ms Wang aims for insight. “The Farewell” examines the differences between its disparate elements without needing to reconcile them. Its aesthetic approach similarly straddles two worlds. With its sparse set design, natural lighting and infrequent camera movements, it finds common ground between American independent cinema and that of Asian naturalists such as Hirokazu Kore-eda (“Shoplifters”) and the late Edward Yang (“Yi Yi”), both of whom chronicle middle-class life and generational conflict in contemporary Asia. Ms Wang’s use of a muted colour palette—the frame is filled with beiges, grays and whites—encourages the viewer to focus more intently on the characters’ inner lives. That is where the real story is, especially for Billi, who mostly keeps her feelings just below the surface. She, too, is dishonest with her family: she has recently been rejected from a prestigious fellowship but when her parents lovingly inquire about it, she tells them that she has not heard back yet. It is a complex role that requires Awkwafina, in a breakout performance, to reveal her character’s inner life to the audience without displaying it to others in the film. It is also a turn towards much more serious fare for the actor, who made her name in comic roles in “Ocean’s 8” (2018) and “Crazy Rich Asians” (2018). In “The Farewell” there are still some glimpses of her skill as a comedian. Having been instructed by Nai Nai to look happier at her cousin’s wedding, she plasters a big grin on her face and bows with extravagant enthusiasm to all her distant relatives. But Awkwafina does not reach for big laughs throughout. Instead, she allows the viewer to sense her character’s feelings and empathise with the discomfort that comes from repressing them. There is a universality to the film’s fish-out-of-water premise, as well as its explorations of loss, family strife and belonging, but “The Farewell” is rooted in Chinese culture. By looking at these customs through the eyes of a partial outsider, the film offers plenty of exposition to help guide Western audiences, while encouraging them to observe proceedings closely and curiously. In that sense, it is similar to “Crazy Rich Asians” and “Always Be My Maybe” (2019)—other recent hit movies written or directed by Asian-Americans. “The Farewell” is already performing well at the box office on a limited release, once again indicating the demand for rich storytelling rather than broad stereotypes. “The Farewell” is screening in a limited number of theatres in America now. It will be released nationwide on August 2nd and in Britain in October