THE POLITICIANS who aspire to the Democratic presidential nomination are now in a field that is 24-strong. The tally no longer includes Eric Swalwell, a young Californian congressman who left the race on July 8th after failing to attract much interest from voters or donors. He will focus instead on seeking re-election to the House. It does include Joe Sestak, a former congressman from Pennsylvania who announced his intention late in June. It also features Tom Steyer, a 62-year-old billionaire from California, who announced on July 9th that he was jumping into the race. That news prompted groans from Democrats. It confirmed Mr Steyer’s reputation for chronic indecision: in January he had been poised to begin his presidential run, only to bow out on the eve of his Iowa launch event. He vowed instead to focus on his activist campaign seeking the impeachment of President Donald Trump. Earlier, Mr Steyer had toyed with, then backed away from, plans to run for elected offices in California.  Mr Steyer looks desperately late. He missed the first round of debates between aspiring nominees in June and is unlikely to qualify for the second lot, in Detroit, on July 30th and 31st. Participation depends on getting at least a 1% popularity rating in opinion polls or drawing 65,000 donors before July 16th. Being eligible for a third round of debates, in Houston in mid-September, looks tougher yet. For that, candidates must notch up a 2% popularity rating in four recent polls and draw money from at least 130,000 donors. Those toughening conditions will soon force out many more candidates from the field. John Hickenlooper, an amiable former governor from Colorado, looks vulnerable. He has cheerfully admitted that his campaign is stumbling and has said that “the vast majority of the problem with the campaign was me” as a poor communicator. Some members of his own staff would like him to bow out early and instead run for the Senate. He says he will carry on. Other candidates who are polling at 1% or below could decide that early August, after the second debate, is a natural time to drop out. Mr Steyer appears to believe that different rules apply to him because, as a former hedge-fund manager, he is extraordinarily rich. He is reportedly worth $1.6bn. It has been reported that he could spend $100m promoting himself, perhaps with a blitz of television advertising in crucial primary states. Perhaps that could make up for his absence from the debates last month. But a bigger problem is likely to be the fact that he is running, rather bizarrely, with a message that corporations and super wealthy individuals have too much influence on American politics. Liberal-minded billionaires can thrive in the Democratic Party. J.B. Pritzker, in Illinois, spent well over $100m of his own cash to be elected as governor of the state last November. But few in the party want a rich, male, white outsider with little political experience as their presidential nominee, however well-meaning he might be. Elizabeth Warren and Bernie Sanders, who campaign by raising small sums from large numbers of donors, will be eager to attack a billionaire in their midst. Michael Bloomberg, New York’s former mayor and another ageing, liberal-minded billionaire, eschewed the race, in part, for such reasons. Why then has Mr Steyer decided to jump in? It could be that he sincerely feels it is his duty to try. In 2018, he spent over $100m supporting Democratic candidates running for Congress. Last year he warned, in dramatic language, that America faced profound division and confrontation. He drew comparisons with the period just before the civil war. Mr Steyer may feel a genuine obligation to try to fix the problem. He has, moreover, resources few candidates can draw upon. In his campaign to promote a petition to impeach Mr Trump, for example, he collected names of at least 6m voters, which have been cross-checked against national voter databases. That is a helpful databank for promoting himself to potentially sympathetic listeners. According to the New Yorker, in his funding for elections last year, Mr Steyer paid for 800 staff and 15,000 volunteers. That could give him a significant structure to work within. Much of his activity was done through NextGen America, a political organisation that targets young voters. Might that be enough to make him a plausible candidate? It looks unlikely. Money matters, but the leading Democrats such as Joe Biden, Kamala Harris, Elizabeth Warren and Pete Buttigieg are announcing impressive donor hauls for the second quarter. Ms Harris’s strong performance against Joe Biden in the debate in June has given her fresh momentum. And Ms Warren, especially, has a raft of detailed policy ideas that could enthuse large numbers of Democrats. Most Democratic voters say the overwhelmingly important consideration for them is finding the nominee with the best chance of defeating Mr Trump. Mr Steyer, who is yet to be noticed by any opinion polls, has done little to suggest he is the one.