THREE YEARS before he died in a car crash in 1965, David Smith was invited to create work for the Due Monde festival in Spoleto, Italy. One or two pieces would have been enough, but given free rein in an abandoned steel factory in Voltri, a district near Genoa, he produced 27 pieces of sculpture in 30 days. The astonished organisers displayed them in Spoleto’s ancient amphitheatre. For the “Voltris”, as they became known, Smith welded objects he found in the factory to steel plates to make a quirky and original set of abstract works. Curved, angular, chunky or folded, they seemed to embody the joy the artist felt in making them. “I’m so grateful to you for my Italian period,” he later wrote to Gian Carlo Menotti, the founder of Due Monde. “It was the greatest and most prolific of my life.”  Three “Voltris” now sit on the lawn at Yorkshire Sculpture Park (YSP), where an indoor and outdoor exhibition of more than 40 works leaves the visitor in no doubt that the artist ranks among the greats of 20th-century sculpture. While others worked in marble and bronze, Smith found inspiration in industrial materials and methods. The show underlines how his pioneering efforts over three decades took modern sculpture in a new direction. His art is often compared to that of abstract expressionist painters. Born into a working-class family in Decatur, Indiana, in 1906, Smith studied painting and drawing at the Art Students League in New York. More important for his art, though, was the time he spent as a teenager at a Studebaker car plant, where he learnt to weld, rivet and work a lathe. By the 1930s, inspired by Picasso’s early works in iron, Smith was using an oxyacetylene torch to turn out ground-breaking welded-metal sculptures, the first of their kind in America. “Chain Head” and “Saw Head”—playful amalgamations of found objects, both on display at YSP— date from that period. In 1929 he bought 86 acres of land in the Adirondack mountains in upstate New York and, from 1940, made a dilapidated farmhouse his home. During the war he worked night shifts assembling tanks but all the while he was gaining recognition as an artist. In 1950 a Guggenheim fellowship freed him financially to focus on his art. His sculpture grew in scale, at the same time becoming more graceful and poetic. The tilted angles and delicately shifting planes of “Hudson River Landscape”, a landmark piece from 1951, seem to capture a sense of moving through the countryside on a train. It shows how Smith had begun, as he put it, to “draw in space”. The sturdiness of “Wagon II”, from 1964, belies its lightheartedness; with its mismatched wheels and upright “driver”, it evokes a strange charioteer. The bright yellow “Untitled (Zig VI)” (pictured), from the same year, also suggests an artist having fun. Smith chopped heavy-duty steel girders into chunks and mounted them atop comically tiny wheels. At the top, a right-angled steel bracket balances precariously on its tip. The playfulness of such pieces can mask the despair that plagued Smith in his last two decades. He needed to be away from the city and close to nature in order to create his sculptures but, living alone in the wilds after the collapse of his marriage to Dorothy Dehner, a painter, in 1952, he wrote in his notebooks of “the fucking lonesomeness—which is not only physical but mental”. He married again soon afterwards, this time to Jean Freas, who swiftly conceived two daughters, Rebecca and Candida. He was an adoring father, but this partnership failed too within five years. “I lack balance—ability to live with another person,” he wrote. His saving grace was his work, which he never doubted; his art was his identity, he said. Rather than make single sculptures, he began producing series—the “Agricolas”, the “Zigs” and the large-scale, polished-steel “Cubis”—and rolled these “families” out into his fields. A photograph depicts him sitting, cigar in hand, surveying their massed ranks in the snow. References to art history recur through Smith’s work, as do references to his daughters. “Untitled (Candida)” (pictured top), made in the year the artist died, is proudly displayed at the top of YSP’s Bothy Garden. At least one scholar has suggested that it evokes an image of the two little girls clinging, as they do in one family photograph, to either side of the artist’s bulky frame. With or without the figurative allusion, like much of Smith’s work, its emotional force is huge. “David Smith: Sculpture 1932-1965” is on display at Yorkshire Sculpture Park until January 5th 2020