IN THE END Beji Caid Essebsi was less than his supporters hoped, and less than his critics feared. The president of Tunisia, the only country to emerge from the Arab spring with a democracy, died on July 25th. He had been ill for weeks, since a health scare in June that left him hospitalised for several days. A transfer of power had been imminent anyway: Mr Essebsi did not plan to seek a second term in elections scheduled for November, saying a younger person should hold the job. His death will simply speed up what looks to be an uncertain vote. He was 92. An old man, a mandarin of the ancien regime, Mr Essebsi was an odd fit for the presidency of a young and newly-free country. After studying law in Paris he returned home to a long string of official posts under the dictators who ruled Tunisia for half a century. He served as ambassador to France and Germany, foreign minister and president of the lower house of parliament. The revolution of 2011 brought a brief stint as interim prime minister. That might have been the end of his career.  History went a different way. The first elected government after the revolt was led by Ennahda, an Islamist party. In 2013, after political assassinations sparked mass protests, it agreed to step down. Mr Essebsi returned to the scene as the head of Nidaa Tounes, a coalition of secular forces determined to unseat Ennahda. He won a presidential election in 2014 with 56% of the vote, and his party gained a plurality in parliament. Some Tunisians compared Mr Essebsi to Abdel-Fattah al-Sisi, the army general who led a coup against the Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt. Before the election they joked that the only difference between the men was “a dot”, a reference to the similarity of their names in Arabic. The comparison was unfair. Though Mr Essebsi wanted a stronger presidency, he did not try to dismantle Tunisia’s democracy. And unlike Mr Sisi, who crushed the Brotherhood, Mr Essebsi struck up a friendship with Ennahda’s leader, Rachid Ghannouchi. Until last year Nidaa Tounes governed in concert with Ennahda, which backed many of the president’s policies. A few of his pet projects were laudable, particularly an effort to grant women equal rights under inheritance laws, which was approved last year. The economy was a constant struggle. An IMF-backed austerity programme outraged the public. Tax increases implemented in early 2018 caused a week of loud, sometimes violent protests. As Mr Essebsi’s support waned, his party splintered: about half of his MPs are now aligned with other groups. Over the past year he fell out with the prime minister, Youssef Chahed, who will lead his own secular faction in parliamentary elections set for October. Under the constitution the speaker of parliament, Muhammad Ennaceur, should now take over as interim president. He must be installed by a constitutional court that still has no judges (the government will probably just ignore that proviso). More worrying is his health: Mr Ennaceur, who is 85, has also been ill of late. Tunisia will then have to organise an election within 90 days, a slightly earlier timetable than it had originally planned for. Exactly who will run is an open question. Polls show the established parties doing poorly. Lawmakers last month approved amendments to the electoral law that block several popular would-be candidates, like Nabil Karoui, a media magnate whose television channel is often critical of the government. Mr Karoui was subsequently charged with money-laundering, which would seem to scuttle his chances. Since the uprising Tunisia’s politics have often been reduced to a struggle between Islamists and secularists, or between the entrenched labour unions and powerful businessmen linked to the old regime. The public is growing tired of all these factions. Established parties are in chaos and voters are hungry for political outsiders. The next president, whoever it is, will be judged above all on his or her handling of a sluggish economy. Mr Essebsi was right: Tunisia needs a younger leader—one not caught up in the battles of the past.