TOURISTS ARE OFTEN attracted to a holiday destination due to the presence of pristine beaches, fresh air and clear seawater. But that does not mean that the travel and tourism industry, as a whole, is very green. A paper published in Nature Change, a scientific journal, last year calculated that the travel and tourism business produces around 8% of the greenhouse-gas emissions produced by mankind each year. That figure included everything from the kerosene used by transatlantic flights to the electricity consumed by hotels and the energy used to make souvenir knick-knacks for travellers to take home. In theory, therefore, it should be good news that on July 30th the Intercontinental Hotels Group (IHG), whose brands include Holiday Inn and Crowne Plaza, promised to remove mini bottles of shampoo, conditioner, lotion and the like—of which it currently uses over 200m each year—from all 5,600 of its hotels by 2021. It is the first major hotel group to promise to do so. Its hope appears to be that, by reducing the amount of plastic waste that it produces, less will end up in the sea where it can do harm to marine wildlife. But environmentally-minded travellers should be suspicious about how green all such promises are. IHG plans to replace its miniature bottles of shampoo and the like with larger alternatives. It has also previously pledged to ban plastic straws in its hotels. And many of its brands are replacing plastic bottles of water with ones made of glass. There is some logic for ditching the use of smaller plastic containers. A recent study by Direct Line, an insurer, found that standard-sized bottles for items such as shampoo and toothpaste contained twice the amount of liquid per gram of plastic packaging used as miniature ones which are small enough to be allowed through airport-security checks. Larger bottles are also much easier for cleaners to refill than smaller ones, which are more likely to be thrown away after their first use.  But if IHG’s changes result in the greater use of alternative materials, such as metal and glass, the move could accelerate climate change. This is because alternatives materials emit much more carbon dioxide during their manufacture than plastics do. Glass bottles, metal cans and cotton bags, even though they may be much studier than their single-use plastic equivalents, are generally not reused enough to make up for the extra emissions used to make them. A study last year by the Danish government found that reusable plastic bags, for instance, produce 52 times as much in carbon emissions to make as a disposable one, and for cotton ones, 7,100 times as much. Aluminium cans—which have recently replaced plastic bottles of water on Royal Carribean cruise ships—can produce six times as much carbon dioxide to make as a plastic bottle of similar size, and then another 50% extra to recycle each time. Single-use plastics may currently be out of vogue with green groups. But this may not always be the case in the future.