NOT EVEN at the peak of the Greek debt crisis did European Union summits run on as long as the one that began in Brussels last night. Leaders gathered on June 30th to thrash out a deal on the EU’s big jobs: the presidents of the European Commission (the EU's executive), the European Council (representing leaders), the European Parliament and the High Representative for foreign affairs and security policy. The presidency of the European Central Bank, which will also soon be vacant, is also in the mix as leaders strive for regional and political balance. At the time of writing, they were still deliberating. The blockage concerns a provisional package of appointments sketched out by the leaders of France, Germany, Spain and the Netherlands on the fringes of the G20 summit in Osaka. This would allocate the commission presidency to Frans Timmermans (pictured), a Dutch Social Democrat, the council presidency to a liberal like Charles Michel of Belgium and the parliament presidency to Manfred Weber, a Christian Democrat from Germany whose bid for the commission job has met with opposition from President Emmanuel Macron of France and others.  This accord has come under intense pressure at the summit. Leaders from the European People’s Party (EPP), the centre-right group to which Mr Weber and Angela Merkel belong, reckon the parliament presidency too puny a prize for coming first in the European elections. They want the commission. Central European governments like that of Poland also object to Mr Timmermans, who as vice-president of the outgoing commission has been a sturdy opponent of illiberalism in the region. Southerners were also aggrieved at their lack of representation—noting that the Osaka proposal would put figures from the Benelux countries in the two most powerful presidencies. The objections began at the EPP’s pre-summit meeting yesterday afternoon, when leaders made known their objections to Mrs Merkel’s plan. The German chancellor left early for one-on-one consultations. All of which delayed the start of the summit's official dinner last night. Then, around 10pm, Donald Tusk, the outgoing council president, suspended the group discussion to hold a series of bilateral meetings before the leaders reconvened for breakfast at 7am. Various packages were floated through the night. One option would see a compromise EPP figure like Michel Barnier, the EU’s chief Brexit negotiator, clinch the commission presidency. But that would break the doctrine (albeit one established only in 2014) whereby a Spitzenkandidat or “lead candidate” of a major parliamentary group during the European election campaign takes that job. Mr Weber and Mr Timmermans were both lead candidates; Mr Barnier was not. The latest permutation under discussion would send Mr Timmermans to the commission and Kristalina Georgieva, the Bulgarian head of the World Bank, to the helm of the council, with Mr Weber as parliament president and Mr Michel as High Representative. Ms Georgieva is highly rated and might satisfy the central Europeans, but has never served as a head of government—which is generally viewed as a requirement for the council job. That the allocation of posts is proving so fraught says something about the state of Europe. There was always intense horse-trading over the big jobs, but in the past it was often squared by grand bargains between France and Germany and between Christian and Social Democrats. Today’s EU is a more multi-dimensional one. The parliament and the European Council are more politically fragmented. France and Germany are at odds and in any case less powerful collectively. After the euro and migrant crises, and amid debates about liberal democracy, regional sensitivities are more raw. Mrs Merkel, once the EU’s leading co-ordinating force, is nearing the end of her time as chancellor; she seems to have misread the mood in her own EPP. The great European Rubik’s cube has more colours and layers than before. Aligning them takes time. So much so that some are already mooting a further summit on July 15th if no agreement can be reached today.