THE THORNIEST question in popular music at the moment is this: who owns a melody? This week two court cases addressed the issue. In California, a jury decided that Katy Perry’s song “Dark Horse” had plagiarised the beat of “Joyful Noise”, a track by Flame, a Christian rapper. Meanwhile the European Court of Justice (ECJ) ruled in favour of Kraftwerk, a pioneering German electronic-music group, in their 20-year-long case against Moses Pelham and Martin Haas. The hip-hop producers had used a two-second sample from Kraftwerk’s “Metall Auf Metall” in the song “Nur Mir” without seeking permission. The ECJ decided that any recognisable sample from a recording should only be used if the original producers had authorised it. Modified, unrecognisable samples could still be used without authorisation, the court clarified. In 1991 sampling in America—the home of hip-hop—was forever altered by Grand Upright Music Ltd v Warner Bros Records, a federal court case. Grand Upright Music successfully argued that Biz Markie, a Warner artist, should not have taken a sample from the Gilbert O’Sullivan song “Alone Again (Naturally)”. Since then, American artists have had to seek permission from the copyright holders before using excerpts of a record (or take care to sample from records so obscure that no one will notice). The immediate effect was that songs built around samples became prohibitively expensive to make, but artists and producers soon found a way around the restrictions: they would simply recreate the relevant section of music with new musicians, paying the original songwriters for what was, in effect, a miniature cover version, but without having to pay a licence fee.  You might think that would have settled everything—but it has not. Some musicians simply do not have the resources to take recourse when their work is sampled without permission; or they are unaware of it; or both. Take Richard Spencer and Gregory Coleman, the singer and drummer, respectively, of a long-defunct soul group called the Winstons. “Amen, Brother”, a track released in 1969, supplied what is often claimed to be the most sampled seven seconds in pop history: a short drum pattern known as the “Amen Break” was a staple of early hip-hop and then, chopped up and speeded up, became the backbone of the form of British urban music known as jungle. Mr Spencer, who owns the copyright to the song, did not even become aware it was being sampled until 1996, and has said that he has never received any payment for its use. Mr Coleman, who played the break, died in poverty in 2006. If the extensive use of samples is considered the prerogative of the rich artist, then so is taking legal action over unauthorised samples. With only 12 notes in a chromatic octave, the quest to find new ways to construct melodies in pop songs has become ever harder. And new songs are studied ever more closely for their resemblance to records of the past, even when they don’t rely on samples. Ms Perry was merely the latest artist at the centre of a copyright case. A controversial ruling in 2015 found that “Blurred Lines”, a hit song by Robin Thicke released in 2013, had plagiarised Marvin Gaye’s “Got To Give It Up”, released in 1977. The judgment seemed to be based primarily on the style of the songs, rather than any similarity in melody, harmony, rhythm or lyric. The five writers of “Oops Upside Your Head” (1979) now collect 17% of the publishing royalties of Mark Ronson’s “Uptown Funk” (2014) after filing a legal action in 2015. Ed Sheeran settled a copyright infringement claim against him in 2017; Taylor Swift listed Right Said Fred as writers on her song “Look What You Made Me Do” as it made melodic reference to “I’m Too Sexy” (1991). The landscape of songwriting credits has been irrevocably altered. What should aspiring recording artists do now, then, to avoid finding themselves in court? Simple. Write something completely and indisputably original, with no resemblance whatsoever to any past recordings. That, or give up music and get a different job altogether.