ENGLISH CRICKET fans have been spoiled this summer. First their country hosted the World Cup, which uses the one-day international (ODI) format. Now, barely a fortnight after England won the tournament, jubilant supporters await Test cricket’s greatest spectacle. August 1st marks the start of the Ashes, a five-game series between England and Australia that has been contested biannually since 1882. The rivalry between the motherland and its former colony in five-day matches has produced many of the sport’s most memorable individual performances. This edition, however, could be an anticlimax. England’s World Cup victory crowned the world’s best ODI team, after a four-year overhaul that produced a swashbuckling side of big-hitting batsmen. England’s Test team, by contrast, is mediocre. So is Australia’s. In fact, a statistical analysis of Ashes history suggests that, after 15 years of outstanding play, the quality of the two sides has fallen to a level last seen during the uninspiring 1990s.  Because there is no annual league in Test cricket, measuring teams’ relative strength is harder than in other sports. The International Cricket Council (ICC) produces historical ratings, but the formula is not designed to predict results, and ignores home advantage. To some fans, this lack of a reliable benchmark of quality is frustrating. For others, it is part of the sport’s idiosyncratic joy. Fortunately, there is a mathematical solution. Analysts have already applied the Elo formula, an algorithm initially devised for chess that can forecast results between two opponents, to a wide range of sports. In team-based sports, each side starts off with an average rating (usually 1,500 points), and exchanges points with their opponents each time they play. More points are awarded for the winners if they defeat a team regarded as much stronger. Devashish Fuloria, a cricket writer and researcher, has trained the Elo algorithm on all Test results since 1877. His model accounts not only for home advantage, but also for the fact that this factor is especially important on Asia’s dusty, spinning pitches. The verdict from Mr Fuloria’s number-crunching is clear (see chart, above). Both Australia and England reached their highest ever Elo ratings around a decade ago. The southern-hemisphere side climbed to 1,805 points in 2008, the all-time record for Test cricket. The “Poms”, meanwhile, made it to 1,670 in 2011, making them the world’s best team at the time. Since then both countries have suffered a gradual decline. Today they sit barely above 1,500. One saving grace of these simultaneous slumps is that the two teams are well-matched. Mr Fuloria currently has Australia ahead by just ten Elo points. Gamblers on Betfair Exchange, a betting market, reckon the hosts have a 50% chance of regaining the urn from the visitors, who triumphed last time. England have a slight home advantage, but need to win the series outright (a 2-2 tie would allow the visitors to retain the trophy). But though this summer’s Ashes are finely balanced, they will feature several second-rate players. Not since 1995 have both teams had such a low Elo rating. If the forthcoming matches are remembered as classics, it will probably be thanks to tense, low-scoring games. There are unlikely to be many remarkable innings extending deep into the fourth or fifth day—as was so often the case between 2005 and 2015. Dust to dust What explains this recent mediocrity? Three reasons stand out. First and most important is a dwindling stock of good Test batsmen, who generally have an average of at least 40 runs per dismissal in first-class games (which include Test matches and four-day fixtures between regional sides). In 2006 Australia could boast of ten such players in their Ashes squad of 16. This summer they have only selected three. England’s batting woes are slightly different. They have plenty of players capable of scoring a few runs quickly in shorter ODI matches. But many of their World Cup stars have failed to consistently make large scores in first-class matches, since they often get themselves out rashly. An over-reliance on this sort of player has made the English team susceptible to losing large numbers of wickets in clusters. One alarming statistic is that England have lost all of their wickets in a single session of Test cricket (lasting a couple of hours) four times since 2016, having not done so in the previous 78 years. Last week they suffered such a collapse against inexperienced Ireland. England’s Ashes squad contains just three batsmen with first-class averages greater than 40—a far cry from 2013, when they could choose between seven of them. The dearth of English and Australian Test batsmen is probably a generational blip, akin to tennis’s lack of youngsters who can challenge Roger Federer, Rafael Nadal and Novak Djokovic. Hitting a ball travelling at 90 miles (145km) per hour precisely for several days is a rare skill. Reassuringly for both England and Australia, they are still uncovering plenty of cricketers with other talents. Australia’s squad this summer includes six bowlers who take wickets in first-class matches for less than 30 runs on average, compared with seven such players on their mighty 2006 roster. England currently have seven bowlers that good, up from six in 2013. (The best of them, James Anderson, has seemed on the verge of retiring for the last two Ashes series, but plenty of promising young pacemen are waiting in the wings.) However, if the selectors have suffered from a lack of quality Test batsmen, they have exacerbated that problem with poor management—the second reason for the decline. Test cricketers often complain that tinkering can destroy dressing-room morale, with players constantly afraid of being dropped. Knowing that your next innings could be your last, and that one bad shot would bring about its end, carries a grim psychological toll. Many batsmen have spoken about their battles with depression and anxiety. Australia’s selectors have become increasingly guilty of discarding Test novices. During the 1990s and 2000s they typically gave debuts to about three new players each year, with the average career lasting around 40 matches. Since 2010, however, they have picked nearly five rookies per year, who have survived 16 matches on average. It is impossible to know how many of these fledglings would have flourished if given longer. But several batsmen with solid first-class averages have fallen by the wayside. English selectors have historically been even more trigger-happy, picking at least four novices a year since the 1960s. Recently, however, they have churned through opening batsmen particularly rapidly. Some 18 players have fulfilled that role in the last seven years, double the number in the previous seven. As with Australia, there have been a handful whose first-class careers warranted a longer run in the team. The third reason for the two countries’ declining results was beyond the selectors’ control: players misbehaving. In September 2017 Ben Stokes, England’s vice-captain, was arrested following a street brawl outside a nightclub. Mr Stokes was later found not guilty of assault, but only after missing an Ashes series. England went down 4-0 to a middling Australia side, stripped of the vice-captain’s resilience with ball and bat. Australia’s incident was more damaging. In January 2018 Cameron Bancroft, a young batsman, was caught by a television camera roughing up the ball with sandpaper from his pocket. Such blatant cheating—the Australians were hoping the tampered ball would swing more—triggered year-long suspensions for Mr Bancroft, Steve Smith (the captain) and David Warner (his deputy). Mr Smith and Mr Warner are Australia’s best batsmen. Without them the team dropped 100 Elo points. Betting markets have priced in their return for the Ashes. But the damage lingers. Tim Paine, a wicketkeeper who offers steady leadership but also a paltry first-class batting average of only 29, was chosen to succeed Mr Smith. Though his performances in Test cricket have been underwhelming, selectors are unwilling to change the captain yet again. The booing that will greet Mr Smith and Mr Warner, as it did during the World Cup, will make this summer’s Ashes particularly feisty. Perhaps the hostile atmosphere will inspire the disgraced duo to play some superlative innings, worthy of the hallowed trophy. Do not be surprised, however, if most matches are exhibitions in shoddy batting.