“BE FORMLESS, shapeless, like water”, said Bruce Lee in his role as Li Tsung, a martial-arts instructor in “Longstreet”, an American television series broadcast in 1971. Lee died two years later in Hong Kong, where the iconic actor’s musings on the nature of water are being re-examined today by fighters of a different kind: demonstrators who, for more than a month, have been roiling the territory with protests against a proposed extradition law. The government shelved the bill last month, but protesters cite Lee in their efforts to keep up pressure on the local government with a new tactic: formless, shapeless protests in scattered parts of the territory, aimed at wearing the authorities down. The demonstrators want bigger concessions. These include the formal withdrawal of the bill—which would have allowed criminal suspects to be handed over to Communist Party-controlled courts in mainland China—and a judicial inquiry into police violence against protesters. But they do not want to repeat the tactics of the “Umbrella Movement” of 2014, which involved weeks of sit-ins and protests in busy commercial areas aimed at securing full democracy in the territory. That campaign secured no concessions from the government and caused resentment among some residents whose lives were disrupted.  The unrest triggered by the extradition law has seen far bigger protests. As many as 2m people took part in a demonstration on June 16th, a day after the government announced the shelving of the law. It was the biggest in the territory’s history. Now activists are organising protests in other parts of Hong Kong, hoping these will tap into a wider range of grievances. They say they will stage them every weekend, in every district, until their demands are met. The first of these, on July 6th, was large: hundreds of thousands of people marched between Tsim Sha Tsui, a shopping district popular with mainland tourists, and West Kowloon railway station, a high-speed rail terminus that is much-used by travellers from the mainland. Protesters said they wanted to “educate” mainland visitors about the extradition bill. Other marches have been smaller, but also targeted at mainlanders. On July 6th residents of Tuen Mun, an area much closer to the border with mainland China, confronted “singing aunties” from the mainland who busk loudly in parks for money. Seven days later in Sheung Shui, another town in the border area, protesters demonstrated against mainland tourists and traders who buy goods in Hong Kong to resell on the other side. On July 17th thousands of older pro-democracy activists, describing themselves as “silver-haired”, marched in central Hong Kong in support of their younger comrades on the front lines. Protests involving the younger types now have a pattern: after an authorised daytime march comes an unauthorised evening confrontation with police, who also have been changing tactics. After a massive daytime protest on July 1st, police initially stood back in the evening as some protesters stormed into the Legislative Council building. The demonstrators were allowed to leave again without being arrested or injured. Now the police seem to be trying to keep protesters stationary and sap their morale by massing around them, a technique known as “kettling”. NGOs say this is unfair because it prevents people from leaving, and risks fuelling violence between protesters and police. The method was used on July 14th after a march in the northern district of Shatin. As the main process had ended, some of the protesters were followed by police into a shopping centre which is connected to a train station. People who wanted to leave found that their exits were being blocked by police and that trains were not stopping. Videos of police beating protesters and protesters attacking police were captured by dozens of journalists, some of whom were also injured. Bystanders hid in shops and toilets. One man is in court for biting off the finger of a policeman who was allegedly poking him in the eye. On the next day Hong Kong’s chief executive, Carrie Lam, visited injured police in hospital and said she would remain the territory’s leader. Her spokesman denied a report in the Financial Times that she had offered her resignation to the central government in Beijing. But she faces a turbulent summer. She will need a strong umbrella.