China’s New Red Guards: The Return of Radicalism and the Rebirth of Mao Zedong. By Jude D. Blanchette. Oxford University Press; 224 pages; $27.95 ONE OF the most important essays written by Mao Zedong was also one of his more turgid, a work published in 1937 entitled “On Contradictions”. Even the most casual observer of modern China can see that a contradiction festers at the heart of Chinese politics: how can this consumerist, mercantilist economic superpower—with its stockmarkets, property bubbles and flamboyant billionaires—be ruled by a party that calls itself Communist, insists it practices socialism and crushes any attempt by workers or peasants to assert their rights?  Far from a casual observer, Jude Blanchette is an astute American sinologist. In “China’s New Red Guards” he deftly traces this contradiction as the common strand connecting much of the news to have come out of China in recent decades. From the most sensational headlines about cut-throat rivalries among top leaders to back-page news about internet catfights among intellectuals, the sacking of an editor at some obscure journal or the shuttering of a think-tank, Mao loyalists have been part of the story. And they remain so as China’s current leader, Xi Jinping, continues his drive towards becoming the country’s most consequential figure since Mao himself. The book’s apt starting-point is Mao’s death in 1976, a moment at which China might have broken with his legacy but could not quite find a way to do so. The man who prevailed once the dust settled, Deng Xiaoping, tried to finesse an official document assessing Mao’s rule. Mr Blanchette recounts the painstaking process, taking two years and nine drafts, which ended with lavish praise for Mao’s achievements but also tagged him with the “chief responsibility” for the disastrous Cultural Revolution. (Mr Deng was himself a bundle of paradoxes, remembered both as the liberal architect of China’s economic miracle and the remorseless hardliner who ordered the bloody military assault on peaceful demonstrators in Tiananmen Square, the 30th anniversary of which was marked on June 4th.) Through close reading of Chinese sources and conversations with key figures, Mr Blanchette brings context to the many “new -isms” (neo-Statism, neo-Authoritarianism, New Leftism and others) that either fed into or crossed swords with the neo-Maoist movement. He also sketches vivid portraits of its leading personalities. Some are hot-headed jingoists bent on spreading conspiracy theories. Others are more measured, arguing in good faith that China has veered too far from the positive bits of Mao’s thinking and his rule. One key battleground has been the reckoning over the devastating famine China suffered from 1958 to 1962, after the failed Great Leap Forward. Much research, by both Western and Chinese scholars, finds that Mao’s recklessly misguided policies caused the famine; their estimates of the death toll range from 17m to 36m. But fearing this would undermine the legitimacy of their hero and that of the party itself, neo-Maoists have railed against such findings as slander and vilified the researchers. Their efforts, Mr Blanchette wryly notes, are akin to those of American climate-change deniers. Neo-Maoists are similarly driven to downplay the horrors of the Cultural Revolution—and in some cases even call for another one. Their zealousness and their wilful misreading of history notwithstanding, neo-Maoists have remained stubbornly influential. This is partly down to the kernel of sense at the heart of their critique: having opened up to the outside world, turned towards a market economy and vastly enriched itself, China is indeed losing sight of its founding ideals. But as much as they rail against Deng and other pragmatists who led China down this path, the neo-Maoists dabble with pragmatism, too. They have, Mr Blanchette says, settled on a “strategic truce” with Mr Xi who early this decade crushed the bid of their true champion, an upstart politician named Bo Xilai. Mr Bo sought to ride Maoist dog-whistles all the way to the top of the leadership; Mr Xi has kept him in prison since 2012—a thoroughly Maoist approach to treating a political rival.