Editor’s note (July 29th): This piece has been updated to include details from a press conference given by the Chinese government’s Hong Kong and Macau Affairs Office IT LOOKED ominous. On July 29th, at a press conference held in Beijing and conducted in Mandarin (rather than the Cantonese spoken in Hong Kong), Hong Kongers would hear directly from the Chinese government’s Hong Kong and Macau Affairs Office. This was the first such briefing the HKMAO had given since Hong Kong reverted from British to Chinese sovereignty in 1997; and it came after weeks of protest in Hong Kong which seemed to have stretched the patience of the central government to the limit. In the event, what was said was less dramatic than some had feared. But it will have done little to quell frustrations in the territory.  Yang Guang, who is a spokesman rather than a policymaker, told reporters that the government in Beijing “condemned the protests and the actions of radical activists” and said their concerns had stemmed from a “misunderstanding” of China’s legal system. He was referring to the spark for the protests, the Hong Kong government’s attempt to pass legislation that would have allowed the extradition of criminal suspects to mainland China. Mr Yang said that, nevertheless, the central government understood and respected Hong Kong’s decision to suspend that bill. Another spokesman said that the government in Beijing strongly supported the government led by Carrie Lam, Hong Kong’s chief executive, but hinted at mistakes in handling the bill which had since been “reflected” on. More than once he expressed sympathy for the Hong Kong police, including the “tremendous pressure” felt by the force and their families. He then outlined China’s red lines regarding Hong Kong: no harm to national security; no challenge to the central government’s authority and the Basic Law, Hong Kong’s mini-constitution; and no use of Hong Kong as a base from which to undermine China. In line with China’s view that foreign forces are behind the protests, he attacked “irresponsible” Western commentators who have backed “violent and illegal actions” by the protesters. He dodged a question about protesters’ demand for an independent inquiry—Beijing still tries to avoid being seen to be setting policy in Hong Kong. But he stopped short of ruling out the possibility of deploying the Chinese army, which has been garrisoned in Hong Kong since 1997. When asked by a journalist whether it could be deployed on the streets he simply pointed to the relevant sections of the Basic Law. Relief in Hong Kong that nothing more drastic emerged from the press conference will be mingled with frustration that there is still no end in sight to the political turmoil. It came after eight weeks of demonstrations, confrontation and worsening violence, during which the use of tear-gas no longer seems shocking, and the territory’s nameless, leaderless protest movement is escalating. The police have been criticised for their heavy-handed tactics. The protesters, too, are becoming more violent. Ms Lam has not commented publicly on the saga for a week. And the protest movement is becoming self-perpetuating—this weekend it was motivated by anger at events a week earlier. A march was held on Saturday to protest against violence on July 21st at a train station in Yuen Long, in the New Territories, a part of Hong Kong on the mainland. Dozens of men in white T-shirts had attacked protesters and ordinary members of the public with sticks and rods. They were widely believed to have been members of criminal gangs, the triads. Citing security issues, the police refused to allow the protest. But on Saturday tens of thousands of people made their way to Yuen Long anyway. Most protesters have by now stopped complaining about the extradition bill. This time their targets were both the gangs blamed for the thuggery at Yuen Long and the entire establishment—above all the police but also local politicians and the Chinese government—and its refusal to allow Hong Kong to elect its own leaders. In previous weeks the presence of huge numbers of people and the conduct of a peaceful march have helped calm tempers. This time protesters were antagonistic from the outset. Many came kitted out with masks, goggles and hats to protect against tear-gas and pepper spray. Some pulled up railings to use as barricades and bricks to use as weapons. Protesters denied coming to Yuen Long to pick a fight but insisted that if triad members turned up they were ready. For the first time many carried hiking poles to defend themselves. At least two cars were vandalised by protesters who claimed they contained weapons and other items that linked the owners to the Chinese government. The police formed cordons around villages close to the station. These became the front lines between protesters and the police. As the sky turned purple in the sunset, a command circulated through the crowd urging protesters to “leave together” at 7.30pm. Many heeded the call. But if the protesters behaved better than many had feared, the police did not. At 10pm they cleared the station with a liberal use of batons. Hospitals reported that 24 people were being treated, two for serious injuries. Amnesty International, a human-rights watchdog, denounced “repeated instances where police officers were the aggressors; beating retreating protesters, attacking civilians in the train station and targeting journalists.” The next day, a Sunday, police were back on the streets again after protesters who had turned up for an authorised rally in a park on Hong Kong Island promptly spread out, blocking roads and forming multiple front lines to face the police. As they did a week earlier, police swept slowly through, trying to disperse the crowds. To slow them down, protesters for the first time lit fires in the street. The government appears to have no idea how to bring the situation under control. Ms Lam spent Saturday afternoon hobnobbing with bigwigs from China, including the head of its Hong Kong liaison office, at a summer camp organised by the People’s Liberation Army. And on Monday, on the orders of the central government, the Hong Kong and Chinese flags above government offices flew at half-mast in mourning for Li Peng, a former Chinese prime minister of China who died on July 22nd. He is known as “the butcher of Beijing” for ordering Chinese troops to use lethal force to end the Tiananmen Square protests in Beijing in 1989. It no longer seems inconceivable to Hong Kongers that the same army might also be brought in to clear their streets.