MUSEUM ISLAND holds great treasures. Eight collections explore the development of European culture from antiquity to the 19th century; there are galleries devoted to Byzantine art as well as artefacts from the Ancient Near East and objects from Muslim societies. Nestled between the Spree River and the Kupfergraben in the heart of Berlin, the five museums together attract more than 3m visitors a year. The buildings themselves are significant. Erected between 1830 and 1930 by Karl Friedrich Schinkel, Friedrich August Stüler, Ernst Eberhard von Ihne and Alfred Messel, the most distinguished architects of their time, they are great, towering edifices which both evoke the Acropolis of Athens and maintain an identity of their own. In 1999 the site and its contents were added to UNESCO’s World Heritage list.  But Museum Island has long been unfit for purpose. When Messel designed the Pergamon building in the early 20th century he envisaged a portico entrance with a saddle roof, but it was never built due to budget restrictions. From the building’s opening in 1930 until 1982, when a lobby in the museum’s forecourt was built, visitors had to enter via a poky provisional access point. Yet even the new space was not equipped to deal with the crowds which flooded in after German reunification—the area is situated in East Berlin—and which made the Pergamon the most-visited art museum in the country. Once tourists made it through the lobby, they were plunged straight into the exhibition halls. The Prussian Cultural Heritage Foundation eventually recognised that there was a problem and in 1998 it established a Museum Island Planning Group; a “master plan” for the renovation of the entire district was adopted a year later. It included the refurbishment of the four existing museums as well as the reconstruction of the fifth, the Neues Museum, which was partly destroyed in the second world war. David Chipperfield, a British architect, and his team in Berlin were tasked with overseeing the redevelopment of the Neues site, which reopened in 2009, as well as the implementation of the master plan as a whole. The idea was to make the five buildings into a modern culture complex, with proper facilities, “barrier-free accessibility” and outdoor spaces. That demanded the creation of a sixth and final building, the James Simon Gallery, which at last opens on July 13th (construction has taken ten years and cost $94m; some critics have called it “the most expensive cloakroom in the world”). It acts as a central entrance hall, with the ticket counters, information desks and shop that you would expect, as well as a space for reading, a café and a restaurant which offers views of the surrounding neighbourhood. There is a gallery for temporary exhibitions and a 300-seat venue which will be used for concerts and lectures. Four of the five museums are now connected by the James Simon Gallery; visitors can also move between the different buildings via the new subterranean Archaeological Promenade. The architects have evidently taken great care not to create something distracting or jarring, with colonnades similar to those of the Neues Museum. The wide flight of steps at the entrance might well become a popular tourist spot akin to the Spanish Steps in Rome, or the Metropolitan Museum Steps in New York. By naming this new building after James Simon, Berlin also pays tribute to one of its most important patrons. Born in 1851, Simon was a philanthropist and art collector who donated more than 10,000 objects—including the famous Nefertiti bust—to the city’s museums. The opening of the building in his name is a key milestone in the regeneration of the area; the final restorations, particularly to the Pergamon Museum and Altar, are expected to be finished by 2025. Organisers hope that by then more than 4m visitors a year will be enjoying Museum Island’s riches in comfort.