WHEN IT came, the fall of Ricardo Rosselló this week was spectacular and fast. The Democratic governor of Puerto Rico clearly thought he could brazen out scandal and popular disapproval. The scion of a political family and the son of a former governor, Mr Rosselló was only midway through his first term. And until this week no elected governor in the territory had ever before been forced from office between elections. He might have survived popular frustration at the agonisingly slow pace of Puerto Rico’s economic recovery. The territory has spent a decade trapped by financial and economic troubles—worsened by the effect of Hurricane Maria, in 2017. That year the island, in effect, filed for bankruptcy. The deaths of an estimated 3,000 people spread shock and misery. Median household income in Puerto Rico is just $19,000 a year, and a large portion of the 3.4m population lives below the poverty line.  And lately, there have been some encouraging economic signs. These include a recovery in job creation, improved growth forecasts and expectations that massive debt will become more manageable in the coming years. If the high demand for swanky restaurants and hotels in tourist areas is any guide, some economic sectors are thriving again. That wouldn’t amount to the ending of economic problems for most Puerto Ricans, but the intensity of gloom is at least in decline. Mr Rosselló might also have found ways to assuage voters who grumbled that his government presided over nepotism and corruption. Such traits, say embittered locals, have been evident in Puerto Rico for many years. But two weeks ago the FBI arrested a pair of senior officials, accusing them of redirecting over $15.5m in funds to favoured businesses. That looked bad for Mr Rosselló, but was not in itself necessarily fatal to his political fortunes. He cut short a holiday in Europe to return to the island. His spokesman promised that the “restoration” of accountability would follow. Although opponents of the governor in Washington, DC, including President Donald Trump, had condemned officials in Puerto Rico as incompetent, it seemed possible that Mr Rosselló could hang on. His talk of only serving a single term as governor, for example, might have assuaged some critics. What killed off the governor’s hopes of survival was the release nearly two weeks ago of a massive trove of electronic messages, shared between Mr Rosselló and a coterie of privileged friends and advisers, in which they mocked the poor, jeered at victims of the 2017 hurricane and joked about the idea of assassinating political opponents. Those messages, and their obnoxious tone, sparked vast street protests and persistent anger, which Rosselló could not overcome. On the evening of July 24th he promised to step down by August 2nd, a message that was greeted with massive cheers and celebrations in the streets of San Juan, the capital. His successor looks likely to be Wanda Vázquez, the current justice secretary, though many have said she is too close to the disgraced governor. Whoever is in charge, the fortunes of Puerto Rico seem unlikely to change much any time soon. It is not clear how much a change of personnel will shift the views of Mr Trump, or others in Washington who determine how much in federal aid flows to the island. In June, Congress agreed to a disaster aid bill for the island, to help it recover from Hurricane Maria, but Mr Trump’s administration has been slow at releasing funds.