AFTER NEARLY five hours on the court and over 400 points of tennis, the men’s singles final at Wimbledon this year was decided by the tennis equivalent of a coin-flip: a first-to-seven-point tiebreak. On July 14th Roger Federer, a 37-year-old eight-time Wimbledon champion, outplayed his opponent. He hit more aces, won more points and broke serve more often. But the man across the net, Novak Djokovic, a 32-year-old who is the top-ranked male player, executed his game better when it mattered. The Serbian saved two match points in the 16th game of the final set, making Mr Federer the first man since 1948 to get within one shot of winning Wimbledon and then lose. Mr Djokovic dominated the climactic tiebreak to secure his 16th career major title, only four behind the all-time record held by his opponent. The final score, 7-6(5), 1-6, 7-6(4), 4-6, 13-12(3), is unique in the sport’s history. Traditionally at the All England Club, the deciding set continues until one player builds a two-game lead. This allowed for the greatest of tennis oddities: 2010’s three-day battle in which John Isner defeated Nicolas Mahut by a final-set score of 70-68. Last year two marathon semi-finals, including a six-and-a-half hour contest again involving Mr Isner, wreaked havoc with the schedule. Wimbledon responded by changing its scoring system to force a tiebreak at 12-all in the deciding set. The new rule ensured that either Mr Djokovic or Mr Federer would be crowned champion before one of them collapsed from exhaustion. But it did not compromise the excitement of the battle. This match will take its rightful place among the most captivating in the sport’s history.  Much of the day’s legacy can be credited to the strength of its cast. Mr Djokovic and Mr Federer were facing each other for the 48th time, in their fifth major final. (The 2014 and 2015 Wimbledon title matches were similarly close duels that went the way of Mr Djokovic.) Both men have, at various times, towered over the rest of the field, and cases can be made that either one is “greatest of all the time” (or, in sporting parlance, the GOAT). Together with Rafael Nadal, a 12-time French Open winner who fell to Mr Federer in the semi-finals, they have maintained an unprecedented stranglehold on men’s tennis. None of the veterans is playing his very best tennis these days, but all three are ageing gracefully, easily swatting aside threats from up-and-comers. At this year’s tournament, the stars aligned for a particularly combative final. Mr Djokovic is the superior all-round player, but Mr Federer’s game is well-suited to the Wimbledon grass. Although the 37-year-old’s pinpoint serving can dominate a match on a fast surface, the on-court conditions were unusually slow over the fortnight. In sum, it was a near-perfect balance. Mr Federer won 218 of the 422 points played, at a rate of 51.7%. That is well within the range of “lottery matches”: contests where a bit of luck, or nerveless play at crucial moments, can tilt the result in either direction. The ability of the two titans to sustain that balance for five hours resulted in what was, according to one measure, the most exciting match of all time. Every point in a tennis match can be graded by its “leverage”—the potential effect it has on the probability that each player will triumph. The “excitement index” metric (EI) takes the average leverage value of each point. For example, the average men’s singles point at Wimbledon this year had a leverage value of 4%, meaning that either player would improve their probability of winning the match by 4% if they won the point instead of losing it. A typical high-leverage moment, like a break point or a tight spot in a first-set tiebreak, has a leverage value around 10%. The most important moments, such as Mr Federer’s break point chances at 11-all in the final set, can exceed 30%. At the match level, an average EI is around 4%, with one-sided contests falling below 2%. Sunday’s final registered an EI of 7.5%. Not only was that the highest of the tournament, but it tops every men’s grand-slam final of the last four decades (see chart). (A handful of women’s finals, which are best of three sets, score higher, because the high-leverage deciding set accounts for a larger fraction of the match.) The Wimbledon decider in 1980 between John McEnroe and Bjorn Borg—thrilling enough to spawn films and re-enactments—is next, at 7%. Another clash often dubbed the most thrilling of all time, the Wimbledon final in 2008 between Mr Federer and Mr Nadal, ranks third, at 6.9%. Although the traditionalists managing the All England Club might not be keeping up with the latest win-probability metrics, the quantifiable excitement of this year’s final is a vote in favour of the unorthodox 12-12 tiebreak. Fourth on the EI list is the Wimbledon final in 2009, in which Mr Federer defeated Andy Roddick with a 16-14 final set. It is one of the few championship matches that would have been affected by the new rule. As thrilling as that duel was, it does not quite measure up to this year’s final, in part because it pitted two exceptional servers against one another, who offered fewer opportunities to break serve. The same is true of the legendary Isner-Mahut contest. Despite its gargantuan fifth set, which contained lots of high-leverage games, the two players endured multiple streaks of at least 30 service games without a break point. After eleven hours of play, the match had an EI value of 6.6%. Had officials called time 114 games earlier, Mr Isner might have stood a chance in his second-round match. Whether a final is decided in the third set or the fifth, in a tiebreak at 6-all or at 12-all, the trophy goes to the player who excels in the high-leverage moments. Mr Djokovic set himself apart in that category. The average point won by Mr Federer had a leverage value of 7.2%, while the typical point claimed by the ultimate victor had a leverage value of 7.9%. Mr Djokovic won five of the six most important points of the match. In the three tiebreaks, Mr Federer committed 11 unforced errors, whereas the Serbian made none. Mr Djokovic has spent his entire career in combat with Mr Federer and Mr Nadal, so pivotal moments on big stages against the greatest players of all time have become familiar. As the gap narrows between the trio’s career grand-slam totals, the stakes will get even higher. The Swiss holds the record, with 20 major titles, but he is older than nearly everyone who has ever competed at this level, and only three of his championships have come in the last seven years. The King of Clay is next, with 18, plus the advantage that he will always have the edge at the French Open. Mr Djokovic’s latest triumph solidifies his place atop the ranking table, meaning that he will be the clear favourite to win his 17th at the US Open six weeks from now. It is anybody’s guess who will ultimately hold pride of place on the sport’s most valued leaderboard. Few players in tennis history have remained so dominant at 32, let alone at 37. If Mr Djokovic follows Mr Federer’s career path for the next five years, he will claim at least three more majors. But when the Swiss veteran eventually hangs up his racquet, leaving few other serious threats on the horizon, it is easy to imagine Mr Djokovic collecting far more. He dispatches most of his opponents easily, and even on those rare occasions when he is narrowly outplayed—as his long-time rival can sadly attest—he still finds a way to come out on top.