IT HAS BEEN described by some as David v Goliath. On July 7th America will face off against the Netherlands in the 2019 FIFA Women’s World Cup final in Lyon. As the three-time World Cup champion, America’s squad is the clear favourite. They have won 11 consecutive World Cup games; their last loss was in 2011. Yet for all their swagger (tea anyone?), the Americans failed to win any of their knockout matches by more than one goal. And the Netherlands’ team, the reigning European champions, have not trailed in any of their matches so far. During the knockout stage, they conceded just one goal. Regardless of the outcome, the match is expected to draw one of the largest audiences in history. This year’s tournament has smashed TV viewing records. In Britain, England’s semi-final match against America, with nearly 12m viewers, was the most-watched TV programme of the year. France’s quarter-final match (also against America) attracted 10.7m viewers, making it this year’s most-watched French TV programme, too. Indeed, numbers are up across the board. In 2015, 750m people tuned in to watch the tournament on television; 86m watched on other platforms. This year FIFA expects viewership across all platforms to reach 1bn (the men’s tournament in 2018 was watched by 3.5bn people).  The blockbuster audiences can be attributed in part to better-quality play. According to Opta, a sports-data firm, in this year’s women’s World Cup, the average number of passes per game—a measure which tends to be higher among higher-skilled teams in more competitive leagues—has increased to 830, up from 750 in 2015. That 10% increase exceeds the rise in any major men’s competition over the same period (see chart). Money is another factor. Between 2013 and 2017 the number of professional and semi-professional female players in Europe nearly doubled, to 3,600. In 2017, the Union of European Football Associations (UEFA), which governs football in Europe, unbundled sponsorship rights for women’s football from the men’s, opening a pathway for brands to enter the market. According to Deloitte, a consultancy, around 60% of major women’s football teams have front-of-shirt sponsors that are different from their men’s team. By the next World Cup in 2023, the company reckons that figure could reach 100%.