TURKEY’S ECONOMY had just begun to show signs of life. Thanks to high interest rates, attempts to mitigate a crisis with the United States and some measure of calm following local elections, the lira was beginning to strengthen. Inflation had dipped to 16%, down from 25% last autumn. Enter Recep Tayyip Erdogan. In the small hours of July 6th, Turkey’s president undid much of the recent progress by sacking Murat Cetinkaya, the head of the central bank. Later that day, Mr Erdogan compounded the damage by proclaiming that high lending rates were to blame for inflation (a view roundly mocked by economists), undermining the central bank and making clear that when it came to monetary policymaking, he was in charge. In reference to Mr Cetinkaya, the president revealed: “We told him several times to cut interest rates at meetings on the economy. We said that if rates fall, inflation will fall. He didn't do what was necessary.“  The market reaction was predictable. The lira plummeted by over 3% against the dollar early on July 8th. Turkey’s stockmarket index fell by 1.5%. Mr Erdogan has scored an own goal, says Paul McNamara, an investment director at GAM, an asset manager. “The best case is that they get a lira sell-off that keeps rates higher than they otherwise would have been,” he says. “The worst case is that they set off a currency avalanche.” Sacking Mr Cetinkaya undermined the central bank’s credibility, said Wolfango Piccoli of Teneo, a risk-advisory firm, and showed that any hopes of normalisation following the local elections were misplaced. Mr Cetinkaya had reportedly come under pressure from Mr Erdogan and his son-in-law, Berat Albayrak, the finance minister, when he balked at the idea of using the bank’s dollar reserves to support the battered lira ahead of the local elections. When Mr Erdogan and Mr Albayrak leaned on him to cut rates or resign, Mr Cetinkaya declined, according to sources quoted by Reuters. He is the first central-bank boss to be sacked in Turkey since 1981, when the army defenestrated most of the country’s political class in a coup. He has been replaced by his deputy, Murat Uysal. Mr Uysal has been handed a poisoned chalice, having to start his term by dealing with the fallout from his own appointment. The bank’s monetary policy board will find it harder to slash borrowing rates at its next meeting on July 25th. Doing so would trigger another currency rout, especially if America’s Federal Reserve holds rates at its own meeting the following week, says Ibrahim Turhan, a former head of the stock exchange. More bad news for the economy might be in store. America has long warned that Turkey would face economic sanctions over its purchase of Russia’s S-400 air- and missile-defence system. Despite rumours of a compromise between Mr Erdogan and President Donald Trump, officials in Washington say sanctions are imminent. The Russian weapons are scheduled to arrive in Turkey this week. Mr Uysal faces a baptism of fire.