BINYAMIN NETANYAHU is nothing if not tenacious. On July 20th he will set a new record by overtaking Israel’s founder, David Ben-Gurion, to become the country’s longest-serving prime minister, in office for 13 years and 128 days. The anniversary will ring hollow. Having failed to win enough seats to form a coalition after an election in April, Mr Netanyahu leads an interim government and is facing a second contest on September 17th. The polls suggest that he will struggle to form a majority once again. Despite his long period in power, the prime minister has consistently failed to increase his party’s share of the vote. (Israel’s right-wing politicians have never enjoyed a majority.) Four of the country’s prime ministers have come from Likud. Under Mr Netanyahu the party has won fewer seats than under the others. He triumphed in four elections largely owing to the weakness of his opponents and the unwavering support he received from religious parties. But now the alliance of right-wing and religious parties which has kept him in charge for so long has fallen apart.  In the past the parties representing Israel’s ultra-orthodox Jewish community were prepared to sit in coalitions led both by Likud and by its rivals from the centre-left. But Mr Netanyahu secured more exclusive loyalty by agreeing to nearly all the religious politicians’ demands on legislation and budgets. That is now costing him. Avigdor Lieberman, a former defence minister and once Mr Netanyahu’s right-hand man in Likud, is now leader of a rival nationalist party. Yisrael Beitenu is targeting Mr Netanyahu’s most vulnerable front. The party has doubled its share of the vote in the polls by promising to enlist religious seminary students, who are currently exempt from the draft that applies to most other young Israelis. Mr Lieberman is tapping into widespread frustration over the disproportionate influence of rabbis over public life. Mr Netanyahu’s main appeal to right-wingers is that he has presided over a decade of uninterrupted economic growth and relative calm within the country’s borders (certainly when compared with the turbulent region around it). At the same time he has withstood international calls to make concessions to the Palestinians. But President Donald Trump’s antics and other crises in the Arab world mean those calls are now quieter. Secular right-wing voters are becoming more exercised about other issues. “Bibi is stuck,” admits one Likud insider. “He can’t rule without his ultra-Orthodox allies but they are now pushing other voters away.” Mr Netanyahu’s long stint in office itself attracts criticism. Both election campaigns this year have focused on his suitability to continue as prime minister. Centre-left parties have refused to sit in government with Mr Netanyahu, pointing to his impending indictments on bribery and fraud. Without them, and without the members of Mr Lieberman’s party, he is almost incapable of gaining a majority. Mr Netanyahu’s main remaining political asset is the lack of a strong competitor. A new centrist party, Blue and White, led by former general Benny Gantz, failed to beat Likud in April and is declining in the polls now. Still, it looks increasingly likely that the prime minister’s rivals will cobble a coalition together in September. That could bring Mr Netanyahu’s record-breaking tenure to an end at last.