SUMMER BRINGS examinations, both for students and for America’s banks. Each year since 2011, the Federal Reserve has set “stress tests” for the banks. They must show how much capital they have, the quality of that capital and what activities they are up to. The Fed uses this evidence to determine whether an adverse shock—economic, financial or otherwise—might put too large a dent in that capital. The tests are one feature of the post-crisis Dodd-Frank financial-reform act, and they aim to ensure that lenders have enough equity on hand should catastrophe strike again. Failure to measure up can result in the Fed curtailing a bank’s ability to distribute cash to shareholders, in the form of dividends or share buybacks. On June 21st the Fed announced that America’s banks passed this year’s tests with flying colours. That paves the way for bumper payouts to shareholders. The four largest retail banks, JPMorgan Chase, Bank of America, Wells Fargo and Citigroup, plus the two biggest investment banks, Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley, purchased $93.1bn-worth of their own stock in 2018. That will rise to $117.9bn in 2019. Most banks have also raised their planned distribution of dividends by more than 10%. On June 27th the Fed approved these capital plans for America’s 18 largest banks (though their approval for Credit Suisse is conditional on the bank addressing what the regulator regarded as weaknesses in its plans for share repurchases and dividends).  In one way, the stress tests were tougher than ever before. The worst hypothetical shock this year included a global recession in which American unemployment rises to 10%, accompanied by sliding property prices and stressed corporate-debt markets. Even under this scenario banks would hold more capital than the Fed’s minimum requirement (although only just in the cases of JPMorgan Chase and Capital One). Randal Quarles, who oversees bank regulation at the Fed, said that “the results confirm that our financial system remains resilient”. But there are fears that the Fed made the tests easier in other ways. A smaller cohort of banks—just the very biggest—was tested this year, following a roll-back of Dodd-Frank passed by Congress in 2018 which meant smaller banks need not be tested every year. And banks were also given more information about how the test would be conducted. In previous years they had received details only about the catastrophic scenarios, not about the models the Fed would use to test them. Banks had complained that this made their task akin to trying to hit a moving target in the dark. Daniel Tarullo, a former Fed governor who stepped down in 2017 and who designed the Fed’s stress tests, had been wary of divulging more information. He feared banks would rearrange their balance-sheets merely to meet the test, and argued that publishing the Fed’s models would “result in less protection for the financial system”. Mr Quarles has a different opinion. He has said the change is akin to “giving banks the textbook—not the test”. The Fed published “enhanced descriptions” of the models it uses in March. Next year the tests may be changed more radically yet. On July 9th the Fed is hosting a conference in Boston to review the stress-testing procedures. Many in the industry suspect that it will say it intends to adopt a new test, the “stress capital buffer”, alongside stress tests. Currently, passing the stress test requires that a bank’s common-equity “Tier 1” capital ratio—a measure of its equity—does not dip below 4.5% in the worst scenario the Fed examines. Proving this requires banks to outline their planned dividend repurchases and share buybacks a year in advance. A stress capital buffer would use the results of the stress test to designate a minimum common-equity Tier 1 ratio for rest of the year. The buffer would be calculated as the difference between a firm’s common-equity Tier 1 ratio at present—and what it would hypothetically fall to under the worst scenario tested. Goldman Sachs’s common-equity Tier 1 capital ratio is 13.3% at present, for example, but would be just 6.7% under the worst scenario. Its stress capital buffer would be 6.6%, the difference between the two. The total common-equity Tier 1 capital ratio the bank would need to maintain year-round would therefore be the minimum (4.5%), plus its stress capital buffer and a surcharge for being big and systemically important. Banks with stable businesses are largely in favour of the change, as it would allow them to vary their dividends and buybacks through the year—as most companies do—rather than outlining plans in advance. But the new procedure would most affect banks that undertake risky, volatile activities, which might see their capital requirements vary wildly with the economic cycle. Although most would end up having to hold roughly the same amount of capital as now, those with large trading business, such as Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley, might have to raise more capital in the future. The goal might be a wise one, however. Passing one stress test is well and good, but what the Fed really wants is for them to be passed with flying colours year after year.