AN ALIEN ARRIVING on Earth might be mystified by the bits of paper, plastic and metal that humans treat with such reverence. Why should some objects but not others count as money? Today, when many currencies are stable and trusted, it seems easy to forget that money involves a confidence trick, pulled off by governments and central banks. A new exhibition at the Bank of England Museum is a reminder of the efforts both to establish and subvert the idea of money over time. The central bank turns 325 this year. To celebrate this anniversary the bank has raided its archives for 325 objects that are broadly representative of its history (a recent two-part BBC documentary has also shown its inner workings). Unsurprisingly, many of the objects on display are money or ways of accounting for it. A tally stick dates from 1694, the year of the bank’s founding. A strip of wood with notches cut across it, and then split lengthwise, the stick allowed both borrower and lender to retain a record of a debt, and was used to log one of the bank’s first loans to the British government.  Early banknotes represented sums that were beyond the reach of ordinary people, but a shortage of gold coin in the late 18th century led to the introduction of £1 and £2 banknotes. More widely circulated and easy to counterfeit, their introduction led to a rash of forgery—a hanging offence. Between 1797 and 1821 more than 300 people were executed for counterfeiting. One of those was Philip Whitehead, an employee of the bank, who was hanged in 1812. The exhibition includes a portrait of his sister, Sarah, who refused to accept his death. Swathed in black, she still visited the bank every day in search of her brother. According to ghost tours the Black Nun haunts the City still. Evidence of more organised attempts to subvert the bank’s money supply is also on show. There are templates for banknotes commissioned, but never issued, by Prince Charles Edward Stuart to fund the expenses of the Jacobite rebellion in 1745. There are notes counterfeited as part of Operation Bernhard, a Nazi plot to introduce fake notes to Britain, which prompted the bank to withdraw high-value notes from circulation for a time. Other objects cast light on the bank as a place of work, and as a reflection of British society. There is an emphasis on the role of women at the bank, from a diary of a clerk doing junior “soul-destroying” tasks at the turn of the 20th century to banknotes signed by the first female chief cashier in 1999. A radiation counter from the 1950s and plans to counter the millennium bug provide reminders of physical and digital threats of the past. There are perhaps more coins and bills on display than most people would care to inspect, even though a £100m banknote (to underwrite the banknotes that are issued by Scotland’s banks) and a cheque for £2bn (part of the proceeds of the privatisation of the water services in 1989) might raise some eyebrows. One of the central exhibits, an especially commissioned artwork, is an origami bouquet of flowers, made with discarded banknotes. In itself it may seem rather underwhelming, but it underlines the strangeness of money: bits of ordinary-looking paper (and now plastic) that, in a suspension of collective disbelief, are coveted. “325 years, 325 objects” continues at the Bank of England Museum until May 29th 2020