“WORKING NINE to five, what a way to make a living,” Dolly Parton sang in her 1980 hit. “Barely getting by, it’s all taking and no giving.” The country-music singer bemoaned the daily grind in her chart-topping anthem. But it was an optimistic time for working women in America. Laws outlawing discrimination against pregnant workers and greater access to birth control helped pave the way for millions of women to join the workforce in the 1960s and 1970s. By 1980, the share of American “prime-age” women—those between 25 and 54–who were either working or looking for work topped the equivalent figure in Canada, Australia, France, Germany and Japan. By the time Ms Parton’s song went platinum in 2017, all of these countries had surpassed America on this measure. Indeed, America has the dubious distinction of being the only G7 country that has gone backwards on this measure over the past two decades. In 1999 77% of prime-age American women were part of the labour force, according to the OECD, a club of mostly rich countries—on a par with Germany and Britain. In 2018, this figure had slipped by two percentage points, to 75%. In the same period, Australia saw an increase of more than nine percentage points; Germany a rise of six. Britain, Canada and France all climbed by two percentage points.  The reversal in America can be attributed in part to a lack of female-friendly labour policies. In the 1980s and 1990s, as rich countries in Europe passed legislation improving conditions for working women—including laws guaranteeing equal pay, maternity leave, access to child care and more flexible work arrangements—America sat on its hands. In 2015 the country ranked 33rd out of 36 rich countries on public spending for families, according to the OECD. Today it is the only developed country not to guarantee paid leave to new mothers. Bringing more women into America’s workforce would yield economic benefits. A study published in 2012 by Booz Allen Hamilton, a consultancy, estimated that increasing the labour-force participation of American women to that of men would boost output by 5%. It would alleviate the problem of an ageing population, too. A decade ago, there were roughly five working-age Americans for every one of retirement age; by 2020, the Census Bureau reckons, there will be just three and a half. More women doing the nine-to-five would help ease this demographic crunch.