THIS YEAR and last, the Supreme Court capped its term with a 5-4 ruling on one of Donald Trump’s policy priorities. In 2018, Mr Trump’s ban on travel from several predominantly Muslim countries earned the justices’ blessing; last month they thwarted his quest to add a citizenship question to the decennial census. Another high-stakes decision on immigration comes in the autumn. In November the justices will review several lower-court decisions against Mr Trump’s termination of Barack Obama’s executive order protecting some 800,000 Dreamers—illegal immigrants who arrived in America as children—from deportation. When the decision in Department of Homeland Security v Regents of the University of California arrives during the heat of the presidential campaign next spring—no matter whether Mr Trump wins or loses the case—the question of immigrant rights will stoke an already fiery debate over the status of non-citizens within America’s borders. Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals or DACA, Mr Obama’s initiative from 2012, provided renewable two-year periods of relief for many undocumented but law-abiding immigrants whose only offence was having been brought to the country illegally before the age of 16. Successful DACA applicants had no long-term guarantees and no path to becoming citizens, but the programme lifted the immediate threat of being sent back to their childhood countries and included authorisation to work in America.  While campaigning for the White House, Donald Trump said he would end DACA. Seven months into his presidency, he tried to follow through on that promise. But after Jeff Sessions, Mr Trump’s first attorney-general, announced the roll-back in September 2017, three federal district courts blocked it. The basis for these judgments was not a dispute over the wisdom of DACA as a policy—it was the far wonkier matter of whether the Trump administration followed the correct procedures when it sought to toss Mr Obama’s executive order in the bin. The Administrative Procedures Act (APA) says government agencies may not be “arbitrary and capricious” when changing regulations. Yet the justifications the Trump administration cited for the change —that the executive order was unconstitutional and that states would sue if it wasn’t scrapped—did not, in the judges’ eyes, clear this hurdle. One of the three federal district court judges to reject this rationale in 2018 was Judge John Bates from the district court in the District of Columbia, who wrote that it was developed with “scant legal reasoning” and was “particularly egregious” given the hundreds of thousands of immigrants who had come to rely on DACA since 2012. With a better explanation for the change, Judge Bates wrote, it could plausibly pass legal muster. But the Trump administration’s second try was found lacking, too. Judge Bates wrote that the follow-up memo from Kirstjen Nielsen, Secretary of Homeland Security at the time, “fails to elaborate meaningfully on the agency’s primary rationale for its decision”. In January 2018, the government had asked the Supreme Court to step in and resolve the matter before the appeals courts, and even before most of the district courts, had weighed in. This extraordinary request was rebuffed by the justices in February 2018, and another try for “cert before judgment” in December 2018 also came up short. The justices considered the government's petition at a private conference in January but took no action then and—in apparent hopes that Congress and the president would come up with a legislative solution to the mess—waited another five months to discuss it. Finally on June 28th, with no legislative solution on the horizon, the Supreme Court said it would step into the fray and decide if the Trump administration’s rescission of DACA can go forward. When the consolidated cases come before the justices in the autumn, the legal quandary may sound familiar. As with the census case, the fate of DACA hinges on finer points of administrative law: whether the executive branch provided an adequate basis for reversing course on Mr Obama’s 2012 directive. No one disputes that new presidents can alter or abandon their predecessors’ positions. The question is whether the crux of the government’s explanation for ditching DACA—the purported illegality of the programme—is plausible and defensible under the APA. In its filings to the justices, the Trump administration has claimed that the DACA rescission is not even subject to judicial review under the APA because the “decision to discontinue the DACA policy falls comfortably within the types of agency decisions that traditionally have been understood as ‘committed to agency discretion’”. The Department of Homeland Security may change its policies, Mr Trump argues, whenever it likes. And the presumption that agencies may conduct their business without judicial oversight “applies with particular force”, the brief claims, “when it comes to immigration”. There is a curious tension in the government’s position. On one hand, the Trump administration claims that Mr Obama’s DACA programme must be cancelled because it was an exercise of presidential hubris well beyond the limits of the law and the powers of the executive branch outlined in Article II of the constitution. On the other hand, it says Mr Trump’s decision to scrap DACA is unreviewable because executive agencies have a free hand to shape immigration policy as they choose, free of oversight from meddling judges. But the second point—along with Mr Trump’s rather extraordinary claim on July 23rd that Article II lets him do “whatever I want as president”—clearly undercuts the first. The case for and against permitting Mr Trump to abandon Mr Obama’s policy of forbearance regarding certain undocumented immigrants will build in the coming months: the next briefs will drop at the Supreme Court’s doorstep in August, with a final round coming in October. The November hearing comes weeks before the first votes are cast in the Democratic primary season. And the justices’ decision regarding a programme that has expanded work opportunities, kept families together and helped boost America's economy will arrive by the end of June 2020, just as the general election campaign is heating up.