THE RELEASE of the new season of “Stranger Things” gives non-Americans a reason to celebrate July 4th this year. It is probably the most popular show on Netflix—at least according to Parrot Analytics, a television consultancy (the streaming site itself does not publish viewer numbers). Many fans will devour all eight episodes in one indulgent sitting by the time the weekend comes around. In 2017 Nielsen, a market-research company, reported that 361,000 people watched the entirety of the second season within the first 24 hours of its release. Tickets for a forthcoming immersive “Stranger Things” experience in London, starting at £49 ($60), quickly sold out. What explains the show’s popularity? It is a mash-up of science-fiction, horror, comedy and adventure, set in the 1980s in the fictional town of Hawkins, Indiana. An intrepid band of nerdy kids suddenly find themselves in a real-life version of “Dungeons and Dragons”, a fantasy tabletop role-playing game. They battle monsters from a parallel universe, the “Upside Down”, which was accessed in a shady government facility. Most of the town’s adults are initially oblivious of the danger but the children are aided by Hopper, the kindly local sheriff (David Harbour), and Joyce (Winona Ryder), one of the boys’ mothers.  The series draws heavily on the novels of Stephen King (such as “It” and “Firestarter”), the early films of Steven Spielberg (“ET” in particular) as well as cold-war classics such as “Red Dawn”. It is scary, but not too scary—unsuitable for five-year-olds but something most children aged ten or older can cope with. The gore and death is leavened by humour and well-observed family dynamics. In 2015, when the Duffer brothers began pitching their series, many networks reckoned that a main cast of children would not appeal to a wide audience. In fact, the youngsters are the show’s strength. Carmen Cuba, the casting director, has chosen an exceptional set of child actors, each with their own distinct personality, and they bicker and giggle in a believable manner. The stand out is Mille Bobby Brown, who plays Eleven, a young girl with telekinetic powers. There is also a group of young adults in the form of Nancy (Natalia Dyer), her boyfriend Jonathan (Charlie Heaton) and former beau, Steve (Joe Kerry). If those characters draw in the teenage audience, adults are attracted by the air of 1980s nostalgia, helped by the casting of Ms Ryder, Matthew Modine (as the sinister Dr Martin Brenner) and in the coming series, Cary Elwes, star of “The Princess Bride”. Both Ms Ryder and Mr Harbour are given interesting back stories and there is the tantalising will-they-won’t-they possibility of romance between the pair. Still, the third season faces a number of challenges. The show has to stay true to the format that made the previous episodes such a success—an episode in season two, where Eleven leaves Hawkins for Chicago, was loathed by fans and critics alike—but avoid feeling tired or repeating itself. The monsters have already been defeated twice, after all. The younger actors are also now 16-17 years old and need storylines to reflect that. But the Duffer Brothers have showed enormous flair so far; Netflix will be confident they can pull off the same trick again. “Stranger Things 3” is available on Netflix from July 4th