PEOPLE WHO have worked with Boris Johnson rarely praise him for his efficiency or integrity. His editors during his career as a journalist have variously described him as a “cavorting charlatan” and “epically unreliable”. During the last Conservative leadership contest in 2016 Michael Gove, a fellow Brexiteer, launched his campaign by claiming that Mr Johnson “cannot provide the leadership or build the team for the task ahead”. Yet on July 24th Boris Johnson will succeed Theresa May as Britain’s prime minister. After a two-month campaign, 66% of Conservative members voted for Mr Johnson to be the party’s leader, rather than Jeremy Hunt. The Tory faithful were undeterred by Mr Johnson’s reputation for chaos and chicanery. According to Ipsos MORI, a pollster, 55% of Conservative supporters think he is a capable leader. Some 36% reckon that he is more honest than most politicians. Those fractions are half as large among non-Conservatives.  Mr Johnson’s overall approval ratings compare favourably with those of the previous six prime ministers. His honesty score of 25% is nearly twice as high as Gordon Brown’s was in the months before he succeeded Tony Blair. And Mr Johnson’s capability rating of 33% is greater than Margaret Thatcher’s was shortly before her election in 1979. He differs starkly from his predecessors on two fronts. Thanks to his wit (some say buffoonery), 79% of Britons agree that he has lots of personality, more than double the equivalent figure for Mr Blair before his election. Mr Johnson’s fondness for obscure historical jokes (and his record of offensive comments about non-whites) mean that 62% think he is out of touch. That is nearly three times as high as for Mr Cameron, his confrère from Eton and Oxford. A prime minister’s initial approval ratings are a poor predictor of his or her future performance. Thatcher’s rose gradually, whereas Mrs May’s spiked and then slumped. The Tory MPs who backed Mr Johnson in the contest have gambled that his eccentric style will win voters round and revive their hopes of re-election. As the Conservatives have grown increasingly fractious over Brexit, support for the party has collapsed, from 39% of voters at the start of the year to barely half that in June. At that point, the polls showed a virtual four-way tie between the Tories, Labour, the Liberal Democrats and the newly-formed Brexit Party. Once it became clear that Mr Johnson would win the leadership race, the Conservatives’ support rebounded, from 20% to 25%, while that for the Brexit Party dipped. Still, nobody really knows how Britain’s first-past-the-post system would divide seats in a contest between four competitive parties. For now, punters on Betfair Exchange, a betting market, have reinstalled the Tories as favourites to win the most seats in the next election (though they give them just a one-in-four chance of winning a majority).