WHEN DAN COATS was first elected to Congress, in 1980, Donald Trump had yet to build his first casino. Mr Coats, who also served as ambassador to Germany during George W. Bush’s administration, represented Indiana in the House and the Senate for 24 years. He is, in short, a deeply establishment Republican, which is why it raised a few eyebrows when Mr Trump appointed him director of national intelligence (DNI) soon after taking office. It surprised almost no one, however, when Mr Trump announced Mr Coats’s departure via tweet on the evening of July 28th. The only surprise was that Mr Coats lasted as long as he did. That is because Mr Coats was often at odds with his boss. He vociferously defended the intelligence community’s assessment that Russia interfered in America’s election, calling Russia’s actions “persistent…pervasive, and…meant to undermine America’s democracy.” Six months later Mr Coats testified to the Senate that North Korea remained committed to obtaining nuclear weapons; Mr Trump believes he can negotiate them out of that position. He warned that Islamic State, which Mr Trump boasts of having all but destroyed, remains capable of causing harm in Syria. The day after Mr Coats’s testimony, Mr Trump tweeted that his “Intelligence people seem to be extremely passive and naïve.”  Mr Coats will depart on August 15th, to be replaced by John Ratcliffe, a conservative congressman from Texas. Compared with his predecessors Mr Ratcliffe’s résumé is thin: eight years as a small-town mayor, two as a federal prosecutor, and four in Congress. Mr Coats spent nearly four decades in public and foreign service; his predecessor, James Clapper, became DNI after a career in military intelligence. If Mr Ratcliffe shares their thoughtful, independent temperaments, he keeps it well hidden; he has been among Mr Trump’s strongest congressional backers. Mr Coats followed facts to the detriment of his relationship with his boss. Mr Ratcliffe twists them to his boss’s favour. He wrongly accused Robert Mueller of exceeding his brief as an independent counsel and incorrectly claimed that Michael Steele’s intelligence dossier began the investigation into Mr Trump’s campaign contacts with Russia. That augurs poorly for America’s intelligence services. In July 2018, during a live interview with Andrea Mitchell, an anchor with NBC, Mr Coats learned that Mr Trump had invited Vladimir Putin to visit the White House. “Okay,” Mr Coats replied, after taking a deep breath. “That’s going to be special”. Mr Coats had reportedly wanted to leave for some time, but did not want to appear pushed; the New York Times reported that he drafted the resignation letter a week ago. By the time he leaves Mr Coats will have been the second-longest serving DNI in that position’s short history. It is neither an easy nor a well-defined role. Until 2005, the country’s senior intelligence official ran the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA). But running one of the 16 agencies that comprise America’s intelligence community while also trying to coordinate analysis and response from the other 15 was always an unwieldy balancing act. Calls to create a separate coordinating position emerged sporadically during the last half of the 20th century, but only grew urgent after the attacks of September 11th. The 9/11 Commission’s report, which came out in 2004, recommended creating a national intelligence director; the following year John Negroponte, a foreign-service veteran, became the first DNI. Yet precisely what is expected of the DNI, and how he is supposed to meet those expectations remains at best a work in progress. The office of the DNI produces the president’s daily intelligence briefing; it has no other statutory responsibilities. The DNI oversees agencies that do not report to him: the intelligence divisions of the armed forces report upwards to their own branches; the surveillance agencies report to the secretary of defence; the FBI is under the attorney-general’s supervision; the CIA has its own director, who is technically beneath the DNI but is invariably a powerful and high-profile figure, and almost certainly skilled enough in the bureaucratic dark arts to avoid any real curtailment of power. The Senate still has to confirm Mr Ratcliffe, which is probable but not quite a sure thing. Mr Trump floated and then withdrew the nominations of two unqualified loyalists (Stephen Moore and Herman Cain) for the Federal Reserve’s board of governors when he realised that Republican senators valued the Fed’s independence more than he did. They may feel the same about the DNI. Just over a year ago, Mr Coats said, “As long as I am able to have the ability to seek the truth, speak the truth, I am on board.” With Nikki Haley and Jim Mattis having departed, Mr Coats was the last establishment member of Mr Trump’s administration. He was also the last who publicly contradicted his boss when he felt it warranted. That no doubt annoyed Mr Trump, but independence is an invaluable quality in a senior intelligence official, and a dangerous one to lack. Sometimes the president needs to be told things he does not want to hear. Whether any senior official in this White House remains able to do that remains unclear.