THE RESULT of the women’s football World Cup final on July 7th seemed almost inevitable. America’s 2-0 triumph against the Netherlands means that their record in the last 45 matches reads thus: one loss, five draws and 39 victories. The United States rarely played scintillating football during the knockout stages of the tournament, labouring to 2-1 wins against Spain, France and England. And for much of the final they struggled to conquer a spirited Dutch defence. But this American squad contains so many outstanding players that stifling them all for 90 minutes is nigh on impossible. In the 60th minute Alex Morgan, a star striker who helped America win the last World Cup in 2015, drew a foul in the penalty area. Megan Rapinoe, another highly decorated attacker, placed the resulting penalty past the goalkeeper. Shortly afterwards Rose Lavelle, a 24-year-old midfielder, strode through the Dutch defence and fired the ball into the bottom corner of the net. The second goal felt symbolic. Ms Morgan and Ms Rapinoe, the team’s co-captains, are part of the old guard—no squad at the World Cup had more international experience than the Stars and Stripes. But Ms Lavelle is one of a handful of exceptional youngsters, along with Lindsey Horan (another playmaker) and Mallory Pugh (a lethal striker) who could torment defenders for years to come.  Some foreign players and fans have complained that the Americans’ exuberance occasionally veers towards hubris. “We have the best team in the world,” boasted Ali Krieger, a defender, during the tournament, “and the second-best team in the world.” But there can be no doubting the country’s abundance of talent. In fact, Ms Krieger could have bragged further still: the current squad is probably America’s best ever. There is stiff competition for that title—not from the men, who failed to qualify for the last World Cup, but from the long list of triumphant women’s sides. Of the eight women’s World Cups since the inaugural tournament in 1991, America have won four (in 1991, 1999, 2015 and this year) and never finished lower than third. However, a historical ranking system created by 21st Club, a football consultancy—which rates teams going back as far as 1999—suggests the current Stars and Stripes may be better than all previous American line-ups (see chart). The rating model can only assess teams relative to their opponents. America’s rating is higher than ever, and the rapid improvement of women’s football means that the class of 2019 would probably beat any that of any previous year. That said, the Americans are not untouchable. During the 2000s they often played second fiddle to Germany. Indeed, 21st Club reckons that the most dominant women’s team in its records was Die Nationalelf in 2007, who won that year’s World Cup without conceding a single goal. Germany’s next generation of players was less talented, leaving France and England as Europe’s strongest contenders. The two countries used to have second-rate teams, only qualifying once each during the first four World Cups. But heavy investment in training and facilities since then has brought them within striking distance of America. Since the last World Cup the United States have played 11 matches against either France or England: they have scored 12 goals and conceded 12, winning six games, drawing three and losing two. 21st Club’s model reckons that both France and England would have nearly a 40% chance of beating their transatlantic rivals in a one-off contest. Indeed, another football statistic—“expected goals”, which estimates the probability of each shot finding the net—suggests that England and France created a similar number of goal-scoring opportunities as America did when facing them in the knockout stages. It just happened to be the United States’ ruthless strikers who made their chances count. Euro millions Whether any European country can pose a long-term threat to America’s supremacy depends on how quickly it can increase the popularity of the women’s game. The Stars and Stripes’ historical dominance has been built on mass participation. In 1972 the United States passed Title IX, a law that banned federally funded organisations from discriminating on the basis of sex, and forced universities to spend as much on female athletes as on male ones. Lots of that extra money went towards football scholarships. Today “soccer” is the third-most played team sport among high-school girls, only slightly behind volleyball and basketball. FIFA, football’s governing body, estimated in 2014 that about 16m women played the beautiful game in North America (the vast majority of them in the United States). Europe had only 6m. However, FIFA also reckoned that European countries collectively were investing nearly $100m a year in women’s football, compared with just $20m for North American countries. The American college system still churns out more stars than any other youth programme. But if football-mad countries such as England, France and Germany devoted even a fraction of the resources to the women’s game that they do to the men’s, they would soon have far superior training. Manchester United have reportedly spent £5m ($6.3m) setting up their women’s team. They will hope to compete with their local rivals, Manchester City, who are owned by the Emirati royal family. Record television audiences in Europe for the World Cup suggest that crowds at women’s club matches will probably swell in the coming season. The American league’s average annual salary of $27,100 has already been surpassed by the wages in France ($49,800), Germany ($43,700) and England ($35,400), according to Sporting Intelligence, a sports website (see chart). The United States Soccer Federation (USSF) gives central contracts to players who represent the Stars and Stripes, which can raise their combined national and club earnings above $200,000. But those deals also oblige them to play for American clubs. If the top salaries in European leagues rise significantly above this threshold, then more players could be drawn across the pond, damaging the American league. That threat might encourage the USSF to pay female players more equitably. The team has filed a class-action lawsuit against the federation. They claim that they still receive less compensation for international matches than the men do, even though they generate as much revenue. (Measuring the pay gap is tricky, because each team has a different collective-bargaining agreement, but the Washington Postestimates that it is at least 10%.) The spectators at the final in Lyon made their thoughts on the matter clear: “Equal pay! Equal pay!” rang out from the stands after the final whistle. The United States’ best ever squad has probably earned a pay rise.