DRESSED IN A cassock-like kimono, the tea master prepares the infusion as his hushed congregation watches. Soshin Kimura, grand master of the Hoshinkai tea school, wields his implements with all the ritualistic elegance of a priest celebrating mass. Mr Kimura prefers the broader idea of “teaism”, rather than “tea ceremony”, as a translation of the Japanese chadō. The “way of tea” reaches its destination with a sip of the viscous, aromatic broth that his assistants pass round in shallow bowls (to bag-dunking Westerners, it seems more like a herbal soup than a well-stewed cuppa). Outside, sunshine bathes the landscaped grounds of Compton Verney. This Georgian mansion in the English Midlands now houses an adventurous art gallery which complements its permanent holdings with one-off shows; Mr Kimura has come to launch “A Tea Journey: From the Mountains to the Table”. Through artworks, ceramics, installations and documents, the exhibition explores how a beverage brewed from steeped leaves of the evergreen shrub Camellia sinensis became as much of a mainstay of daily life in Britain as in Japan or the plant’s original homeland, China.  “A Tea Journey” enlightens and surprises. It is a reminder that the most familiar of everyday commodities may trail an epic story in its wake. Ancient Chinese tea-ware, Asian and European ceramics, prints and paintings, ephemera from the international tea trade, specially-commissioned tea-inspired pieces: all combine to illustrate the role that the crop and its consumption has played in global trade, history and culture over the centuries. Chinese legend and folklore have lauded the ability of the Camellia sinensis leaf to provide refreshment without stupefaction since ancient times. Its cultivation centred on the Wuyi mountains of Fujian province, but spread through China and then Japan as the favoured drink of Buddhists. By the ninth century, Japanese travellers returned home with both tea itself and knowledge of the vessels required to consume it as an infusion. But only in the mid-17th century did other outsiders begin to carry the herb’s renown to the West. A Dutch East India Company account from 1657 brings Europe the good news about this mysterious cup that cheers but does not intoxicate. By the early 18th century, fine porcelain from Meissen and rival factories provided the pots, jugs, cups and saucers that would turn Europe’s own tea ceremony into a domestic cult. While public coffee-houses hosted the masculine pursuits of politics and commerce, tea at home became a feminine domain. By the mid-18th century, a commodity that had once traded in Europe at the equivalent, in today’s prices, of £850 ($1,050) per pound had spread from palace to cottage. An official British report from 1834 records the established custom of the “tea-break” in factories. Tea has sometimes played the villain’s part in economic history. In Phoebe Cummings’s new installation, “An Ugly Aside” (pictured above), tea and opium-poppy plants moulded from raw clay entwine into a sort of sinister poison garden. It reminds the viewer that the opiates harvested in colonial India and sold in China helped fund the insatiable British thirst for imported tea, and that Britons’ love of a brew indirectly provoked the Opium Wars of 1839-42. Britons once sweetened their drink with slave-grown Caribbean sugar, and the ghosts of imperial commerce lend a bitter tang to several contemporary artworks here. In Paul Scott’s tea service “Cumbrian Blue(s)”, traditional willow-pattern motifs recall the fate of forsaken Chinese cockle-pickers, themselves immigrants from the tea-growing highlands of Fujian, who drowned in Morecambe Bay in 2004. In a sweeter vein, Kazuhiro Yajima, a Japanese architect, has created an “Umbrella Tea House” (pictured), crafted out of bamboo and paper. Cunningly engineered, his fragile edifice conjures up the sociability of tea consumption and the power of a shared beverage to wash away differences. The narrow door of the traditional tea-house, Mr Yajima explains, forbade clients to carry divisive marks of distinction (such as swords) through its portals. “They had to get rid of their social status. People are equal and peaceful inside.” Despite its sombre allusions to the tea trade as a vehicle of global injustice, the exhibition delights the senses. From the austere beauty of Tang dynasty bowls and the fanciful Oriental scenes painted on Georgian teapots, to the haunting sounds of tea-pickers’ songs from Bengal, the arts of tea have blended into every culture that has learned to enjoy a proper cup. Another pleasure comes into play in the “sensorium”. Here, an array of loose-leaf samples, from smoky Lapsang Souchong to perfumed jasmine and fragrant Darjeeling, tantalise the nostrils. The displays at Compton Verney tell tea stories to sip and to savour. Afterwards, in the well-stocked café, thirsty visitors can swap theory for practice. “A Tea Journey: From the Mountains to the Table” continues at Compton Verney, Warwickshire, until September 22nd