IT HAS been a rough fortnight in the federal courts for President Donald Trump. On June 27th, his bid to add a citizenship question to the census failed to win the blessing of a Supreme Court majority. On July 3rd, his national-emergency declaration to fund a wall on America’s southern border was blocked by the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals in California. And on July 9th, the Second Circuit Court of Appeals told the president that one of his Twitter habits—blocking users with whom he disagrees—violates the First Amendment of the constitution. The lawsuit, Knight First Amendment Institute v Trump, was launched two years ago by seven Twitter users whose messages critical of the president spurred Mr Trump to block them from viewing or interacting with his tweets. Since taking office in January 2017, the plaintiffs argued, Mr Trump has been using his Twitter account “as an instrument of his presidency” from which he broadcasts key “news and information about the government”. A federal district court ruled in favour of the challengers in May 2018, finding that @realdonaldtrump, Mr Trump’s Twitter account, is a “public forum”, not a space for merely private musings. “The viewpoint-based exclusion” of specific people from his account, the lower-court judge wrote, is "proscribed by the First Amendment”.  In a 3-0 decision upholding that ruling, Judge Barrington Parker wrote that Mr Trump turns to Twitter “to conduct official business and to interact with the public”. He used @realdonaldtrump, for example, “to announce the nomination of Christopher Wray as FBI director and to announce the administration’s ban on transgender individuals serving in the military”. (More recently, Mr Trump announced a reversal of the government’s position on the citizenship question, to the surprise of lawyers at the Department of Justice.) It is a violation of the First Amendment, Judge Parker wrote, for a public official to use social media “for all manner of official purposes” yet “exclude persons from an otherwise-open online dialogue because they expressed views with which the official disagrees”. One thorn in Mr Trump’s side was comedian Nick Pappas, who in 2017 posted a cheeky response to a presidential tweet on the administration’s ban on travel from several predominantly Muslim countries. “Trump is right”, Mr Pappas wrote. “The government should protect the people. That’s why the courts are protecting us from him”. This bit of criticism earned Mr Pappas a block, which prevented him from seeing the president’s tweets while signed into his account and barred him from engaging with them. In finding for the plaintiffs, the three-judge panel emphasised the “extraordinarily high level of public engagement” with Mr Trump’s tweets—”thousands of replies, some of which, in turn, generate hundreds of thousands of additional replies”. And the court noted “all the trappings of an official, state-run account” emblazoned on the president’s Twitter page: “Donald J. Trump ‘45th President of the United States of America, Washington 15 DC’”; photos of Mr Trump signing orders, giving White House speeches and “meeting with the pope, heads of state and other foreign dignitaries”. Once he has opened up an “interactive space to millions of users and participants, he may not selectively exclude those whose views he disagrees with”. The Second Circuit clarified that its decision would not affect all social-media profiles held by public officials. A state legislator who uses an account mainly to post cat photos and baseball updates would not be subject to the same constraints and could presumably block users who make fun of his pet or favourite team. Nor does this week’s ruling say anything about whether Twitter and other platforms are obligated to respect users’ freedom of speech—an issue at the heart of several companies’ decision last summer to remove content by Infowars conspiracy theorist Alex Jones. But the decision in Knight Institute is a significant statement about the role of the internet and social media in the contemporary culture of political discourse. Debate concerning “the conduct of our government and its officials” is “wide-open” and “robust”, Judge Parker wrote, with an uncommonly high “level of passion and intensity”. A spokesperson for the Department of Justice noted the government’s dismay over the ruling and said it is mulling “possible next steps”. Mr Trump could take one of three tacks: ask the full Second Circuit for en banc review, appeal to the Supreme Court or relent. He would be wise to take the conciliatory path. “[I]f the First Amendment means anything”, the Second Circuit wrote, “it means that the best response to disfavoured speech on matters of public concern is more speech, not less”.