THE VIALS are small and twisted, resembling worms or caterpillars; inside them, a liquid glows pink. It is a “lentivirus vector, hybridised with vesicular stomatitis and a plasmid containing genes for red fluorescent protein and oxytocin expression”—in other words, a love potion. In theory, if you were to smash open a vial and drink it, you would be infected with a virus that would boost your body’s production of oxytocin, a hormone which plays a role in sexual arousal, recognition, trust and bonding. But as the elixir is not safe for human consumption it remains behind glass in a cool, dark room in the Fridman Gallery in downtown New York, where it is part of a show called “At the Temperature of My Body”. The piece, “Lovesick”, is one of Heather Dewey-Hagborg’s recent experiments in merging science and art. It was made in collaboration with researchers at Integral Molecular, a biotechnology company which specialises in antibody discovery. After the divisiveness of the Brexit vote and the American presidential election Ms Dewey-Hagborg began to think about possible antidotes to the “alienation and hate of the present”; “the work is envisioned as an activist intervention,” she writes on her website. Next to the vials are photographic prints of the virus at work on kidney cells and T cells as well as a video installation. Soft singing fills the gallery: it is the sound of Ms Dewey-Hagborg and her partner singing “CYIQNCPL”, letters which denote oxytocin’s proteins.  Ms Dewey-Hagborg has long been interested in biotech. Made between 2012 and 2014, her “Stranger Visions” project involved collecting strangers’ genetic material from public places—on chewing gum and cigarette butts, or strands of hair—analysing it, and then creating portrait sculptures of them. An exploration into the emerging techniques of biological surveillance and forensic DNA phenotyping, the series proved prophetic. Law-enforcement agencies now sometimes do use DNA from crime scenes to create mugshots. But Ms Dewey-Hagborg is not didactic, showing the positive, weird and beautiful possibilities of new technologies as well as their dangers. When Chelsea Manning was in prison, she and Ms Dewey-Hagborg corresponded. Ms Manning sent clippings of her hair and swabs from her cheek which were processed as genomic data and analysed by an algorithm. That produced 30 possible likenesses of Ms Manning, whose image was repressed at the time, which Ms Dewey-Hagborg turned into 3D portraits. “Probably Chelsea” was hopeful about technology, demonstrating how it might illuminate things deliberately concealed by the state. The work in “At the Temperature of My Body” mostly explores intimacy—how it is changing, or could change, with the advancement of science. In a video piece, “T3511”, Ms Dewey-Hagborg plays a biohacker who becomes increasingly obsessed with an unknown person, based solely on information gleaned from a saliva sample purchased online. (The video was inspired partly by her association with Ms Manning, and the strange familiarity of working with someone’s genetic material.) It is an expression of yearning, projected onto a person who has no known physical form but exists in a series of potentially knowable characteristics. Ms Dewey-Hagborg says that “T3511” was a way of considering the complexities of direct-to-consumer genetic-testing services such as 23andme and ancestry.com. “They’re increasingly a way people are connecting to each other,” she says. “That can be a beautiful thing. It can be a scary thing. It’s definitely scary that it creates this much bigger police database. Suddenly there’s a great potential here for state misuse of DNA.” “Spirit Molecule”, the final piece in her show, is a speculative, ongoing genetic-engineering experiment that also deals with grief and loss. A collaboration with Phillip Andrew Lewis, a botanist, it attempts to combine psychoactive plants with human DNA. The idea is that, if it succeeded, you could consume the DNA of a dead relative or friend like a drug, or keep the plant as a memorial. At the Fridman Gallery, while a video of a man recounting his memories of a loved one plays, a scientist is working on the project. “I’ve lost two people I’m very close to this year,” Ms Dewey-Hagborg says. “I do think that a memorial like that, whether the plant would simply grow and be cared for by myself, or consumed...is something I would personally want.” Ms Dewey-Hagborg’s show feels urgent precisely because it uses the technologies that the art critiques. She is not standing at a distance from biotechnology; she is engaged with its processes and mechanisms. This gives her work a unique realism, even as it imagines possible futures and worlds that will never come to pass. “At the Temperature of My Body” is showing at the Fridman Gallery in New York until August 9th