URSULA von der Leyen will be the new president of the European Commission and Christine Lagarde will be the new president of the European Central Bank (ECB). That, at least, is the proposal of the EU’s heads of government, who met in Brussels today for an unexpected third day of talks on the allocation of the EU’s top jobs. The European Council, which comprises the heads of government of the 28 member states, initially gathered on Sunday evening. They negotiated through the night and into yesterday morning, at which point Donald Tusk, the council president, extended proceedings to give leaders a chance to sleep and regroup. Today a deal was reached. Angela Merkel and Emmanuel Macron, Europe’s two most powerful leaders, had initially put forward a package that would have seen Frans Timmermans, a Dutch social democrat, lead the commission. Mr Timmermans was a so-called “Spitzenkandidat” or lead candidate. In other words, his political family had designated him its candidate for the commission job ahead of the European election which took place from May 23rd to May 26th. In some eyes, the Spitzenkandidaten of the various parties had a mandate from the voters (evidence suggest few voters knew who any of them were and even fewer voted to give them a mandate). But Mr Timmermans proved a difficult choice. Leaders of the European People’s Party (EPP), the centre-right group of parties that includes Mrs Merkel’s Christian Democratic Union (CDU) in Germany, objected to the allocation of the powerful commission job to a social democrat. Central Europeans dislike Mr Timmermans for his record of taking on governments like that of Poland for their illiberal excesses.  Having failed to agree on a package of appointments with a Timmermans-led commission at its core, today leaders cast their gaze elsewhere. Mr Macron suggested Ms von der Leyen, the German defence minister. A moderate in the CDU, she belongs to the EPP. She is acceptable to the central Europeans, having increased Germany’s military commitment to the defence of NATO’s eastern borders. She was a capable families minister and has pushed to modernise Germany’s armed forces (with patchy results). So she made a broadly acceptable candidate to lead the EU’s executive. With that role settled, the other big jobs fell into place. Mr Macron got a French president of the ECB in Ms Lagarde, who currently leads the IMF. Liberals, who gained seats in the European election and had hoped to clinch the commission, get the presidency of the European Council in the form of Charles Michel, Belgium’s prime minister. Social democrats get Josep Borrell, Spain’s foreign minister, in the role of EU high representative for foreign and security policy. The package is not perfect, but nor is it terrible. Ms von der Leyen, though not dazzlingly charismatic, is a mature and moderate administrator who speaks fluent English. Mr Borrell will be the most heavyweight figure to serve as high representative since the job’s creation in 2009. Mr Michel is a decent deal-broker (you have to be, in Belgium's messy politics). And Ms Lagarde is a capable communicator who has said sensible things about the euro-zone, avoiding the ideological hawkishness of her German counterparts. Overall the deal is a win for Mr Macron, who may have killed off the Spitzenkandidat system (which he dislikes) while getting friendly faces into both the commission and the ECB. But all is not yet settled. Ms von der Leyen must be approved by the European Parliament. She will probably clear this hurdle, but European politics is fragmented and unpredictable these days. If she is rejected, the whole package will fall apart.