“THE STENCH was horrendous”. That is how Josh Dawsey, a reporter for the Washington Post, described a migrant detention centre in McAllen, Texas visited by Mike Pence, America’s vice-president, on July 12th. Mr Pence seemed less alarmed. “Look, this is tough stuff” he acknowledged at a press conference after the visit. “I knew we’d see a system that is overcrowded,” he added. For more than a year, American policymakers have faced criticism for conditions at detention centres along the southern border, where migrants caught entering the country illegally are held. The two main parties cannot agree on what to do about the overcrowding. Democrats argue that it is inhumane to hold people in cages; some Republicans have other ideas. On July 15th President Donald Trump tweeted that if the centres are too crowded then “tell them not to come to USA, and tell the Dems to fix the Loopholes - Problem Solved!” Roughly 45,000 unauthorised immigrants are currently being detained by America’s Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) agency in more than 200 centres across the country. That number has increased from about 38,000 when Mr Trump took office in January 2017. Another 13,000 children who have crossed the border alone—mainly from El Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras—are being housed by the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), up from about 6,700 two years ago (see chart). Before migrants are sent to ICE and HHS facilities, many stay for short stints at facilities run by the country’s Customs and Border Protection (CBP) agency. Earlier this month, a government watchdog published a report documenting overcrowded, squalid conditions at five such facilities in Texas. According to the report, some adults were held in standing-room-only conditions for days or weeks; some children lacked access to showers, clean clothes or hot meals.  In June Congress passed an emergency spending bill providing $4.5bn for programmes that house and care for migrant families and children. Thanks to the new funding, border officials say they are now holding just 200 unaccompanied children along the border, down from 2,500 in May. Youngsters picked up by CBP officers are now being turned over to HHS in a timely manner. But the bill, which needed to pass the Republican-controlled Senate, lacked the health-and-safety standards demanded by many Democratic lawmakers. This means that, as Mr Trump hits the campaign trail, he may face yet another public outcry over government treatment of migrant children at the border.