ONE MONTH after Iran shot an uncrewed American spy plane out of the sky in the Strait of Hormuz, America has returned the favour. On July 18th the USS Boxer, an American warship loaded with marines, zapped an Iranian drone that had approached within 1,000 yards and refused to “stand down”, according to President Donald Trump. The drone was taken out not by bullets or missiles, but by electronic warfare used to jam its signals. The Boxer and five other ships had been passing through the strait as a show of force, and Iranian helicopters and ships had been making close passes, according to the Wall Street Journal. On July 19th Iran claimed that all its drones are accounted for. “I am worried that USS Boxer has shot down their own [drone] by mistake!” tweeted Iran’s deputy foreign minister. America and Iran have a long history of drone dust-ups. A decade ago American jets shot down an Iranian drone flying 80 miles inside Iraq. In 2011 Iran went one better: it claimed to have nabbed one of America’s cutting-edge RQ-170 Sentinel spy drones, 140 miles inside its border with Afghanistan, by jamming the aircraft’s signals and feeding it false GPS data. Iran triumphantly produced several knock-offs based on the captured design.  In subsequent years, Iran has complained bitterly of American drone flights near its land and maritime borders. In 2012 it began firing back. In November of that year Iranian jets shot unsuccessfully at an unarmed Predator drone flying in the Persian Gulf for the first time. America insisted that its aircraft was not in Iran’s airspace, which extends 12 nautical miles out from the coastline, but 4 nautical miles beyond that in international skies. The problem is that such things are hard to verify. A Predator travelling at higher speeds would cover the distance into Iranian airspace in mere seconds. Nor do American spy planes always broadcast their location. The American drone downed by Iran on June 20th appeared not to have its public transponder switched on. That is “aggressive” and “like driving with your headlights off at night”, says Steffan Watkins, an Ottawa-based researcher who monitors open-source information on aircraft and ships. By contrast, American spy planes that fly near Russia tend to keep transponders on, to avoid misunderstandings. Mr Watkins also points out that America even seems to have used falsified transponder numbers to impersonate Iranian planes on occasion. These are risky tactics at a time when the Persian Gulf is thick with American military aircraft and Iranian missileers are likely to have twitchy trigger fingers. This week’s skirmish comes at a particularly sensitive moment. On the same day as the USS Boxer’s take-down, Iran’s Revolutionary Guards announced that they had seized a ship carrying 1m litres of oil and its crew of 12, accusing it of smuggling. In fact, that was probably the latest Iranian riposte to an intensifying campaign of American sanctions, as well as to Britain’s seizure of a tanker laden with Iranian crude oil off Gibraltar on July 4th. Britain said it believed the tanker was carrying oil to Syria. Iran denies this and accuses Britain of breaking international law. Iran, crushed by the weight of sanctions, is eager to show it can impose a cost on America and its allies in turn. In May and June Iran was accused of planting mines on several commercial ships in the Persian Gulf. And on July 10th Iranian forces attempted to halt a British tanker, reportedly retreating only when a British warship trained its guns on the Iranian boats. The root cause of the crisis is America’s decision to walk away from a multinational nuclear deal signed with Iran in 2015. Though Iran remained in compliance with the deal for a year, in recent weeks it has begun breaking several of its provisions, such as caps on the quantity and purity of enriched uranium. On a visit to New York this week Iran’s foreign minister, Muhammad Javad Zarif, offered to give international inspectors greater access to Iran’s nuclear facilities if America would lift sanctions. That was meant to happen anyway in 2023, as part of the nuclear deal; Mr Zarif’s offer would simply accelerate the timeline. But it was the first concrete proposal from an Iranian government that, less than a month ago, said Mr Trump’s sanctions meant the “permanent closure” of diplomacy. Making cosmetic tweaks to an old pact and slapping Mr Trump’s name on it is a tried-and-tested trick. In November America’s trade deal with Canada and Mexico was changed slightly, renamed USMCA and then embraced by Mr Trump. “Minimal changes could be enough to call it the Trump Agreement,” says Ernest Moniz, who played a key role in negotiating the original deal as secretary of energy in the Obama administration. But there is a small problem with attempting this solution for Iran, points out Nick Miller, a professor at Dartmouth: “to execute it, Trump would need to fire or ignore most of his national security team.” Mr Trump’s advisors have been busy trying to box in the president. In May last year Mike Pompeo, the secretary of state, insisted that Iran cease all enrichment as one of a dozen conditions to be laid down for a new deal. On July 18th John Bolton, Mr Trump’s national security advisor, tweeted that “one of the worst mistakes of the Iran deal, now on full display, was allowing Iran to maintain enrichment capabilities.” Such drastic new prohibitions would go well beyond the face-saving modifications that Iran is likely to accept. More aerial skirmishing probably lies ahead.