BLOOD LEAKS and gushes from the art in Anish Kapoor’s new show at the Lisson Gallery in London. Almost literally in the case of his silicone and fibreglass reliefs: the gauze dangling beneath them is spattered with scarlet. In his oil paintings, meanwhile, blood-red spurts emanate from corporeal pinks and black cavities and orifices. Black is deathly, says Mr Kapoor, but also, like red, a colour of earth. Mr Kapoor, a British artist who was born in Mumbai, is best known for his monumental sculptures (including a gigantic tubular installation in the Turbine Hall of the Tate Modern in 2002). His new series of paintings contemplate the idea of ritual, and the meaning of blood—which, as he puts it, is “associated with the abject and impure”. In particular, the paintings evoke menstrual blood. That motif raises another question, a version of which these days confronts artists in every genre and form. “Can a man deal with women’s issues?” Mr Kapoor muses. “Is a man allowed to?”  Would that anxiety have occurred to him, say, 20 years ago? “We live in times of political correctness,” he responds, adding: “I am for it.” All the same, Mr Kapoor insists, “we have to manage it rather carefully”—in other words, being sure to safeguard artistic freedom. “Give me a break! What crap is that?” he asks of the notion that, for instance, a white artist should not explore a black person’s experience. Such leaps are the purpose of what he calls “the artistic imagination”. The only real question, he thinks, is whether the resulting work of art is good or bad. Some of the shapes in his paintings—“partial objects”, Mr Kapoor calls them—are distinctly female, but the bodily references of others are more ambiguous. His white canvases suggest purity, and contamination, but also an androgynous disembodiment. In fact, while these paintings trespass on a particular “taboo” in their concern with menstruation, the curves and concavities of much of Mr Kapoor’s previous work likewise convey a preoccupation with bodies and sexuality. In his telling, the turn towards characteristically female forms goes well beyond him: he reckons that the entire history of art since Freud has involved a reorientation from phallic forms to the inward kind. In another of Mr Kapoor’s metaphors, instead of peering from the mouth of the cave up into the sky, artists have instead turned back into the shadows. The layout at the Lisson Gallery reinforces the theme of ritual. Several of the canvases hang around a pink onyx sculpture, in which twin ovoid shapes are encased in a sarcophagus or urn. As Mr Kapoor sees it, the blood in his paintings is pouring into the recesses of the stone, which to him resembles a mikveh or Jewish ritual bath (he is Jewish, but also describes himself as a practising Buddhist). To this reviewer’s eye, the sculpture evokes a receptacle for the blood of a sacrifice; Mr Kapoor accepts that interpretation, too. Purity and defilement, sacrifice and cleansing: in art, as in life, contradictory things are often bound together. “Anish Kapoor” is showing at the Lisson Gallery, London, until June 22nd