JUST AS it looked like America and China were close to a deal, President Donald Trump has brought the two countries back to the brink of a full-fledged trade war. In a pair of tweets late on May 5th he threatened to slap 25% tariffs on all Chinese imports, a rate that applies to only a much smaller portion of imports now. “The Trade Deal with China continues, but too slowly, as they attempt to renegotiate. No!” he said. Only a month ago he had trumpeted that an “epic deal” was in the works. The sudden shift in tone rattled investors in Asia, and most of all in China. The CSI 300, an index of major Chinese stocks, fell by nearly 6% on May 6th, its worst day in more than three years. The first question is what the fallout will be for trade talks. Intensified meetings in recent weeks had fuelled the impression that an agreement was in the offing. American negotiators, led by Robert Lighthizer, the United States Trade Representative, were in Beijing last week. This week Liu He, a Chinese vice-premier, was due to lead a delegation of dozens of high-level Chinese officials on a trip to Washington for the next round of discussions. Observers had started to scrutinise Mr Trump’s public schedule to find gaps when Xi Jinping, China’s president, might meet with him to sign their pact. June looked like a good option. Few would bet on that today.  Mr Trump might have thought that his threat would ratchet up pressure on China, helping to squeeze out more concessions just before the finishing-line. Instead, there is a real chance that he might provoke a hardening of China’s position. Some even speculated that Mr Liu and his travelling band of officials would pull out of this week’s meetings. “Let Trump raise tariffs. Let’s see when trade talks can resume,” tweeted Hu Xijin, editor of Global Times, a state-owned Chinese tabloid known for its nationalist streak. (Chinese regulators seem content to let Mr Hu use software to evade the Great Firewall and send out such messages on Twitter, which is otherwise blocked in China.) For months the rough outline of a deal has seemed clear. China would pledge to buy more goods from America to narrow its trade surplus, and America would pledge to lower tariffs on Chinese imports so long as China levels the playing-field for foreign companies. But the details were always vexing. How to measure China’s progress in reforming its economy? American officials have grown tired of what they see as China’s foot-dragging in fulfilling its promises. How to enforce the deal? America wanted the right to impose tariffs with no threat of retaliation if China violated the agreement. Chinese advisers said that was a non-starter. Given these difficulties in striking a grand bargain, a woollier set of compromises seemed the more probable outcome. Trade tensions would surely persist, flaring up intermittently in the coming years, but the prospect of tit-for-tat tariffs would diminish. Now, though, the immediate risk is escalation. Last year America imposed 25% tariffs on $50bn-worth of Chinese imports and 10% on a further $200bn-worth, leaving another $300bn or so untouched. Mr Trump has threatened a two-step increase. First, on Friday, America would ratchet up the 10% tariffs to 25%. Shortly thereafter it would place 25% tariffs on all remaining goods (a public comment period would slow down actual implementation). So far China has been moderate in its retaliation to American tariffs, even lowering duties on car imports from America as talks inched ahead. But if America goes ahead with tariffs across the board, Mr Xi will come under pressure to fight back. Because China imports much less from America than it exports to America, tariffs are only a limited option for it. One scenario is that it could hurt America in other ways—for example, by using state media to turn consumers against companies from Starbucks to Apple, which count on China as a big source of revenue. “The first step in negotiations is to build trust,” says Zhu Ning, an economist at Tsinghua University. “Now it seems that trust is almost gone.” A full-on trade war would, unquestionably, be damaging for both countries. As the bigger exporter, China would probably suffer more. But Mr Trump is fooling himself if he thinks that he can bring China to its knees with tariffs and that America itself will be unscathed. Over the past half-year, China’s government has administered a moderate stimulus that has stabilised growth and fuelled a big rebound in its stockmarket. Even with Monday’s plunge, Chinese stocks are still up by 25% since the start of the year. The government has kept fiscal firepower in reserve, in part because of uncertainty about the trade war. Increasing its stimulus programme would help cushion the blow from higher tariffs. As for America, consumers there have largely been shielded from the impact of tariffs on Chinese imports because they have been focused on industrial inputs. If tariffs were to be applied on all imports, consumers would not be spared: the cost of goods from pillows to smartphones would rise sharply. The risk of mutually assured slowdown has stayed Mr Trump’s hand in the past. It was when the American stockmarket fell sharply in December that momentum toward a trade deal with China began to build. Xu Gao, an economist at Everbright Securities Asset Management, a Chinese firm, remains optimistic that the same logic will prevail. Mr Trump, he reckons, will ultimately back off the tariff threat, for fear of undermining America’s growth. Even with all the bluster, that still seems plausible. But the scope for miscalculation is all too apparent.