A BOOK-LENGTH opinion striking down Ohio’s congressional map by a panel of three federal judges on May 3rd was written with one particular readership in mind—the justices of the Supreme Court. They have the last word on whether the constitution imposes limits on partisan line-drawing. The federal judges, appointees of George W. Bush, Bill Clinton and Barack Obama, explained how Ohio’s map was rigged to ensure that 12 of the state’s 16 seats in the House of Representatives would go to Republicans despite voters’ fairly even red-blue divide. The ruling concludes that “a predominant partisan intent infected the whole map” in violation of the federal constitution, and orders the state to introduce a remedial map by June 14th. (If the deadline passes without an acceptable map, the court will have one drawn up.) But with an appeal on its way to the Supreme Court—and similar cases pending there involving gerrymanders in Maryland and North Carolina—the staying power of the ruling against Ohio’s map is in the hands of the nine justices. The 301-page ruling opens with a detailed account of how Ohio’s “remarkably pro-Republican redistricting bill” was crafted and adopted without Democratic input after the 2010 census. Republican legislators gathered in a DoubleTree hotel room stripped of its usual furnishings and, using three computers, ran “Maptitude”, software that allows cartographers to draw lines “down to the census block unit” and see “corresponding demographic and historical election data for the newly drawn districts in real time”. By the time the draughtsmen unveiled the maps to the legislature, the district lines had been tweaked and polished with the help of Republican consultants masterminding similar efforts in other states. Governor John Kasich signed House Bill 369 into law on September 26th 2011.  Relying on testimony from lawmakers, legislative staffers and political scientists, and based on their own examination of the district lines, the judges analysed Ohio’s congressional map by asking three questions. Did Republicans intend to stymie Democrats in the House elections? Did they succeed? And are there reasons other than pursuing a partisan advantage that could explain the contours of the districts? The answers were yes, yes and no. Republicans gerrymandered on purpose, with stunning success, and no evidence suggests the maps served any function other than to guarantee a 3-to-1 advantage for the Republican Party. “[I]nvidious partisan intent”, and nothing else, marked the map-drawing process. The ruling in Ohio A. Philip Randolph Institute v Householder explains why the plaintiffs have the legal right to sue in court, the issue on which a challenge to a Wisconsin gerrymander foundered at the Supreme Court last year. It walks through each relevant district, pointing out oddities and laying out how the Democratic plaintiffs were harmed by being “packed” together or by having their influence “cracked” into multiple Republican strongholds. It discusses several metrics political scientists use to measure the extent of cartographical partisanship. And it argues that Ohio’s map dilutes Democrats’ votes in violation of the First and Fourteenth Amendments as well as the Election Clause of Article I. But the heart of the opinion—the passage where the three judges are all but beseeching the nine justices to jump on the anti-gerrymandering bandwagon—is a 10-page section entitled “Pragmatic and Historical Considerations”. Here, the three judges speak clearly and directly to the men and women who will be reviewing their ruling and the companion gerrymandering cases from Maryland and North Carolina. Each of the four points in this section seeks to allay justices’ worries about “justiciability”—the ability of courts to subdue partisan map-makers. First the judges sought to address Chief Justice John Roberts’s concern in the 2017 Gill v Whitford argument that the court will look like it is siding with one party or another each time it blesses or rejects an electoral map. The impression that the justices are playing favourites will cause, he said, “very serious harm to the status and integrity of the decisions of this court in the eyes of the country”. Not so, the Ohio panel said. Courts are “only fixing the process by which voters enact political change” when they keep an eye on gerrymandered maps. Scrutinising district lines, Justice Felix Frankfurter wrote in 1946, could be a fraught exercise that brings judges into "the political thicket"; Paul Clement, the lawyer defending the North Carolina gerrymander, cited that warning on March 26th. But it is the Supreme Court’s "obligation”, even if "unwelcome", the Ohio panel wrote, to crack down on politicians seeking to hamstring voters. The justices should not shrink from their duty to “level the playing field” when nefarious actors meddle with the right to vote. The three-judge panel also refuted Mr Clement’s contention, quoting Justice Sandra Day O’Connor in 1986, that gerrymandering is a “self-limiting enterprise”. That ship has sailed, the court argued. Advances in technology and data-collection (as Justice Elena Kagan wrote last year) “insulat[e] officeholders against all but the most titanic shifts in the political tides”. As for the oft-heard argument that gerrymandering is as old as the republic, the panel noted that the Federalists saw the practice as “a blow at the constitution and a travesty upon the Bill of Rights when it allowed the minority to govern.” That blow is only amplified two centuries later. And the judges threw cold water on suggestions from several justices that gerrymandering can be fixed via state efforts. It would be “absurd”, the judges wrote, to stay out of the thicket and ask plaintiffs to seek redress from “the entity that committed the alleged violation in the first place”. Will the judges who tossed out the Ohio map—together with similar panels striking down gerrymanders in Wisconsin, Maryland, North Carolina and, most recently, Michigan—persuade the Supreme Court to finally take a stand against partisan redistricting? None of the justices seems to enjoy handling a raft of gerrymandering complaints. Justice Breyer lamented in 2016 that racial gerrymandering cases—requiring the justices to wade through “5,000-page records”—just keep coming, year after year. He and other justices are not keen to play map overseer for a new category of skewed-line complaints. But it would seem almost contemptuous for the justices to reject the growing consensus among their lower-court colleagues that gerrymandering claims belong in court and that workable standards exist to adjudicate them. If the Supreme Court gives the green light to contorted line-drawing, attorney Paul Smith said in a 2017 hearing, the coming decade will bring "a festival of gerrymandering the likes of which this country has never seen".