EVERY ONE of Quentin Tarantino’s films has been a love letter to pop culture in general and to cinema in particular, but none of those odes has been as explicit or as gushing as “Once Upon a Time...in Hollywood”. A two-and-three-quarter-hour tribute to Tinseltown, the film is a loosely bound anthology of vignettes extolling the charms of the dream factory as it was in 1969: the cars, the clothes, the on-set camaraderie. It’s a sleepy and ultimately happy comedy—too happy, perhaps, given that it stirs fact and fiction together, and features the Charles Manson cult and the murder of Sharon Tate. Mr Tarantino is so deeply in love with the movie business that he can’t peer at its dark side for long before returning to its sunlit swimming pools and studio backlots. The film begins with a fun black-and-white clip of an actor and his stunt double being interviewed in the 1950s. The actor is Rick Dalton (Leonardo DiCaprio), the earnest, buffoonish star of a hit TV series about a sharp-shooting bounty hunter in the Wild West. The stunt double is Cliff Booth (Brad Pitt), Rick’s easy-going best friend. When the audience sees the duo again, a decade has passed—and what a difference a decade makes. Rick has been reduced to humiliating cameo appearances on variety shows. Cliff, meanwhile, hasn’t had any stunt work for a while, but he sticks by Rick as his driver, handyman and drinking buddy.  Their bromance is the heart of “Once Upon a Time...in Hollywood”, although it might have been more affecting if it was clearer what Cliff got out of it. After he has chauffeured Rick back to his house in the hills every evening, he gets out of the actor’s Cadillac, gets into his own battered car and drives back to his trailer to feed his dog and eat food out of a packet. He shows no sign whatsoever of resentment, and no desire for companionship that isn’t provided by a dog or an employer. That is typical of the film’s mellow mood. Early on, an agent (Al Pacino) tries to persuade Rick to make spaghetti westerns in Italy, but he has to be the kindest and most honest agent who has ever been portrayed on screen. Roman Polanski (Rafal Zawierucha) moves in next door to Rick with his starlet wife, the aforementioned Tate (Margot Robbie). There is a whisper that Tate’s ex, Jay Sebring (Emile Hirsch), is planning to steal her away, but Mr Tarantino doesn’t elaborate: the director prefers simply to gaze at Tate as she strolls around in her white mini-skirt and boots. The film’s most interesting and unsettling conceit is that the ranch where Rick and Cliff once shot their TV show is now occupied by Charles Manson and his brainwashed acolytes, and Cliff suspects the ranch’s owner (Bruce Dern) has been kidnapped—or worse—by the interlopers. But, again, Mr Tarantino prefers to see the funny side of the situation. He has no truck with the pitch-black cynicism of “Mulholland Drive”, “The Player” and all of the other great films about the scandals, exploitation and sheer craziness of La La Land. Indulging in dewy-eyed nostalgia with all of his usual obsessive attention to detail, Mr Tarantino lets the good times roll instead. And when the inevitable orgy of gory violence finally begins, even that is nowhere near as horrifying as you might fear. Mr Tarantino’s film is entertaining, of course, in its rambling, jokey way, but it doesn’t have much to say except that things often work out better in the movies than they do in real life. An escapist homage to the escapism industry, “Once Upon a Time...in Hollywood” is as much of a fairytale as its title implies. “Once Upon a Time...in Hollywood” will be released in America on July 26th and in Britain on August 14th