BALLERINAS PIROUETTED behind a glass wall in a church-turned-dance-studio in Amsterdam. In front of the partition stood Marko, a 26-year-old student, ballot paper in hand. During the elections for the European Parliament, which took place between the 23rd and 26th of May, the studio doubled as a polling station. Marko had not voted in the previous poll in 2014. This time was different. “Right-wing parties are coming up,” he said, ignoring the dancers twirling behind him. “It’s really important to make my voice heard.” He was not the only voter feeling more motivated. Around 51% of eligible voters cast their ballots in this year’s European elections, up eight percentage points from five years ago. It was the first time turnout increased since direct elections to the European Parliament were instituted in 1979.  After decades of decline, European voters are returning to the polling booths, for both national and European contests. The trend is uneven. Turnout fell in some countries, such as France and Italy, and flat in others. But it has increased in many states, shooting up by nine points in Spain’s general election last month, to levels not seen in two decades . Sweden’s last year saw the highest turnout since 1986. Voter participation in Dutch and German elections, both in 2017, climbed by seven and five points respectively. What might account for this turnaround? One explanation is that more seems to be at stake in recent elections as politics becomes more polarised. Populist parties, which rail against established elites, seem particularly adept at reaching people who do not normally vote. In Germany’s general election in 2017, a study by Infratest Dimap, a German polling agency, suggests that people who previously did not vote were the largest source of new votes for the Alternative for Germany, a Eurosceptic, anti-immigration party. Last weekend, it gained 10 seats in the European Parliament, with turnout across the country up by a quarter from 2014. Spikes in Dutch turnout, such as in the 2002 general election or last month’s provincial elections, have coincided with the formation of new far-right parties. The rise of right-wing populism is also boosting turnout among its opponents. Some leftist parties are explicitly using the threat from the far right as a rallying cry. “The boundary between going forward and going backwards...can be just one vote,” Pedro Sánchez, Spain’s Socialist prime minister, told voters before they went to the polls last month. It seems to be working. Like their Eurosceptic counterparts, strongly Europhile parties have gained seats in the European Parliament. Even beyond the far right, smaller parties are growing at the expense of larger established ones, which means voters now have more choices than before. The centre-right Ciudadanos and left-wing Podemos parties in Spain, both of which first gained seats at the national level in 2015, have become mainstays of political life. Eco-friendly Dutch voters can choose between GroenLinks and the more hardline Party for the Animals. Fatima, a teaching assistant at an Islamic school in Amsterdam, says she did not vote until DENK, a party geared towards Dutch Muslims, was founded in 2015. Growing worries about climate change are probably also driving up political participation, especially among young voters. “I’m here to save the environment,” declares Pierre, a student in the German town of Duisburg, adding that he and many of his friends became politically aware by attending Fridays for Future protests, a series of weekly student strikes that have grown in recent months. Organisers say 320,000 people in Germany participated in them on May 24th. Green parties across Europe won a total of 69 seats last week, up by 19 from 2014. Another factor in increasing turnout is social media. In many countries, Facebook reminds users when elections take place, sometimes offering links to websites that help people find polling stations. “On my way here, I saw a poster telling us to go and vote,” says Pierre. “Social media is like seeing that poster every day.” Even Grindr, a gay dating app, had an advertisement urging users to “vote for your future” in the European elections. Is high voter participation good for democracy? “High turnout is not necessarily evidence of civic health,” argues Peter Kellner, formerly of YouGov, a polling agency. “It can also be a sign of a divided society.” Tom van der Meer of the University of Amsterdam disagrees. Even though rising turnout is associated with greater political polarisation and fragmentation, he says, “democracy is fundamentally about inclusion.”