THE ONLY fair conclusion from the European election in Britain is that the country is still split down the middle over Brexit. On a total turnout of around 37%, slightly higher than in 2014, Nigel Farage’s new Brexit Party was the biggest winner, taking some 32% of the vote and 28 seats. Adding in the remnant UK Independence Party took the two clearest pro-Brexit parties to a vote share of 35%. Mr Farage immediately claimed that voters were telling politicians that they wanted Brexit to happen without a deal on October 31st, the current departure date. Yet if strong Leavers had a good night, so did strong Remainers. The Liberal Democrats got 20% of the vote, giving them 15 seats, and the Green Party 12% of the vote and seven seats. Adding in the new Change UK party, which had a bad night, and the Scottish and Welsh nationalists takes the combined score of pro-Remain and pro-second-referendum parties to almost 40%, well ahead of the two pro-no-deal parties.  The biggest losers in the election were the Conservatives and Labour. The combined vote share of what are traditionally known as the two main parties fell to just 23%, down from 82% in the 2017 general election and less than half their share in the previous European one. The Tories had a truly shocking night. Their vote collapsed to just 9% and they won only three seats. Clearly many Tory voters, disappointed that Brexit has not happened yet, so necessitating this election, deserted to back Mr Farage’s Brexit Party (while many Tory Remainers fled to the Liberal Democrats). But Labour did only a little better, with 14% of the vote and ten seats. The party suffered from what voters saw as its ambiguous position on Brexit, with insufficient clarity over whether it wants a second referendum or which side it would support if there were one. Its leader, Jeremy Corbyn, promised to reflect on the result and hinted more strongly than before that he might come round more explicitly to supporting another Brexit referendum, though not all his advisers agree. The bigger question is what impact this election will have on the contest to succeed Theresa May as Tory leader and prime minister, which will formally get under way on June 10th. Some Conservative MPs were quick to conclude that the party must now embrace a no-deal Brexit, so as to fend off Mr Farage. His strong showing should thus boost the leadership hopes of the frontrunner, Boris Johnson, who has promised that Brexit will happen on October 31st with or without a deal. Yet other Tories remain fearful of the consequences of crashing out of the European Union without a deal in October. They say there is no sign that Brussels will agree to make any big concessions to an incoming pro-Brexit prime minister, which might mean that it will be necessary to ask for a further extension of the Brexit deadline. Rory Stewart, another leadership candidate, has already said that he would not serve under Mr Johnson if the latter embraced no-deal. Other Tories think the same. So if a new Tory leader seeks to outdo Mr Farage by backing a no-deal Brexit, he or she may be unable to secure a parliamentary majority. And that brings the country back where it started: still sharply divided over Brexit.