LIKE “THE TEMPEST”, “Small Island” starts with a storm. As a tropical hurricane whirls in the opening scenes, the stage of the National Theatre in London is lashed with rain; palm trees bend and sway. Both Shakespeare’s play and “Small Island”—adapted from a novel by Andrea Levy that was published in 2004—unpick the complex, vicious tangle of power relations between coloniser and colonised, insider and outsider. But where the action of Shakespeare’s play takes place on a single small island, Levy’s novel unfolds across two: Jamaica and Britain. Yet it is hard to say which island the title refers to. There is a shared history: as Ambalavaner Sivanandan, a novelist, said of colonial migration, “we are here because you were there”. Many of the Caribbean migrants who boarded the HMT Empire Windrush to Britain in 1948 did not see themselves as immigrants at all. They were British citizens, making a homecoming to the “Mother Country”. Many fought Hitler alongside British troops in Commonwealth brigades. But as the protagonists of “Small Island” find out, many British people did not quite see it that way.  This epic, compelling production tells Britons the story of their own country, and of themselves. Like the novel, Helen Edmundson’s adaptation jumps between different perspectives and timelines, deftly conjuring the childhoods of two principal guides, Hortense (Leah Harvey) and Queenie (Aisling Loftus). Hortense grows up in a hazy Jamaican idyll of tamarind trees and woodpecker nests, unsettled only by her god-fearing authoritarian foster parents. On the other side of the Atlantic, Queenie, an Englishwoman, hauls guts and fills pies on a wet pig farm in Lincolnshire, before escaping to London. When Hortense and her husband Gilbert (Gershwyn Eustache Jr) follow Hortense’s rakish runaway cousin Michael (CJ Beckford) to Britain, taking up lodgings in Queenie’s house, their lives intersect with all the drama and incidental complexity of a Victorian novel. The play’s extraordinarily wide scope, ranging from Jamaican independence to the Partition of India, reflects the reach of British imperialism. Yet this historical breadth is never at the expense of emotional depth. Ms Harvey enchants with her portrayal of the proud but vulnerable Hortense, her pursed lips occasionally cracked by tears. Mr Eustache is a haplessly likeable Gilbert, and Mr Beckford charming as Michael. No character is redundant; even the non-speaking Arthur (David Fielder) is riveting as Queenie’s shell-shocked father-in-law, the play’s haunting historical conscience. Queenie’s husband Bernard (Andrew Rothney) is, at the beginning, a cliché of English propriety, but he develops into a profoundly complex and flawed character, capable both of deep love and vile racism. Bernard is one of many depictions of British prejudice in the play. Gilbert and Michael both joined the RAF and fought in battalions that were—unlike American forces—unsegregated. This only heightens the sense of betrayal, however, when they encounter deep and vicious bigotry on civvy street. The full spectrum of racial hatred is unflinchingly laid out: the sniggering in the street, the faux politeness of landlords as they reject black tenants, all pointing to the real violence that bubbles away beneath the surface, ready to burst forth at the slightest perceived provocation. Since the 1940s changes in British law, policy and culture have put paid to many explicit manifestations of racism. Yet prejudice lingers. The word “Windrush”, once a metonym for mythical British tolerance and diversity, is now often suffixed with “scandal” after it emerged last year that elderly immigrants from the Caribbean were being deported as part of the Home Office’s efforts to meet arbitrary net-immigration targets. “Small Island” sharply demonstrates that the scandal was not a one-off aberration: it was just another example of the discrimination that British people from the Caribbean faced from the moment they arrived. Britain’s understanding of this history of colonialism remains limited. As Gilbert says when a clueless villager asks him if he’s from Africa: “Why don’t they know anything about their own empire?” Seventy years later, the question is still pertinent. “Small Island” goes some way to addressing it, with all the humanity and vividness that this story demands. “Small Island” is now playing at the National Theatre in London until August 10th