LISA HANAWALT started making comics when she was six. She was drawn to animals from the start—both her parents were biologists at Stanford University—but her creations were cartoonish and anthropomorphised rather than lifelike. There were donkeys, dog-people and cat-people, usually wearing patterned sweaters, but horses were a particular favourite. “I REALLY Like Horses,” she wrote aged 11. “I want to be famous for drawing Horses someday.” It was a hobby she didn’t grow out of. In high school, Ms Hanawalt would doodle during class or work on her zine, “Lobster Rags”. She and Raphael Bob-Waksberg, a friend, would sit together and flick through her sketchbook, creating narratives and imagining characters’ voices. They kept in touch, and once Ms Hanawalt finished her diploma in art at the University of California, Los Angeles, Mr Bob-Waksberg asked her to collaborate on a new animated television show based on her drawings. It would become “BoJack Horseman” (2014-), an award-winning show about a washed-up sitcom star. The main character is a horse, and the supporting cast is made up of cats, dogs, deer and humans. A sixth season will be released on Netflix later this year.  “BoJack Horseman” has been celebrated for Mr Bob-Waksberg’s clever writing—particularly its satire of Hollywood—and Ms Hanawalt’s visual style. Her characters combine human sensibilities with animal instincts. They wear clothes, have jobs and engage in emotionally fraught trysts, but they also cough up hairballs, neigh or like to be called “good boy”. The places where they live and work are meticulously constructed. Silly visual gags are hidden in almost every scene: a cafe menu lists “croissant juice” for sale, while a movie poster for “When Tabby Met Snappy…” hangs on an office wall. Ms Hanawalt inserts versions of famous artworks by the likes of Andy Warhol, David Hockney and Georgia O’Keeffe into settings in order to comment on the characters that occupy these spaces. This oversaturation of details works well for a show on Netflix, where the viewer can pause the action, or return to previous episodes, to pick up clues they might have missed. Now Ms Hanawalt has created “Tuca & Bertie”, an animated series of her own (Mr Bob-Waksberg is an executive producer). Wildlife, once again, provided the creative animus. Ms Hanawalt watched a documentary about toucans and was amused by the selfishness of the bird, which uses its long beak to steal and eat eggs from other nests. She began drawing comic-strips about Tuca, a toucan-woman. In one short sketch, Tuca builds a lavish nest, readying it for an egg. But when the egg is laid, she loses interest, letting her nest disintegrate. Eventually she fries the egg to eat, and the “cycle begins again”. “Tuca & Bertie” is full of such surreal and oddly dark plots. The show focuses on the relationship between Tuca (voiced by Tiffany Haddish) and her best friend and downstairs neighbour, Bertie, a songbird (Ali Wong). Each episode begins with a seemingly prosaic situation but devolves into something strange and unexpected. In one episode, Tuca catches an STD, and her “sex bugs” start running rampant at the grocery store, demanding they enjoy the same rights to life and happiness as everyone else. In another, Bertie mistakes a bowl of her boyfriend’s grandmother’s ashes for sugar, which results in the deceased robin coming back to life in the form of a cake. She lives on in her grandson’s stomach. It is a carefully considered blend of the absurd and the realistic, often involving such topics as mental illness, misogyny, addiction and trauma. When Bertie’s coworker, a rooster, sexually harasses her, she is shocked and unable to find the right words. One of her breasts, meanwhile, pops out of her chest, yells a little bit and storms off. Bertie spends most of the day with a chest cavity while the breast takes a much-earned break at the local bar. In “Tuca & Bertie” Ms Hanawalt has constructed a humorous alternate reality: Bertie works at Conde Nest, while Facebook is “Facebeak” and the BBC stands for “British Bird Channel”. Fans of “BoJack Horseman” will enjoy these puns, new visual clues as well as the commentary on the strangeness of human behaviour (when Bertie and her boyfriend have sex on the sofa of their apartment, a neighbouring birdwatcher ogles them through binoculars and narrates the birds’ mating rituals). Yet its tone is altogether more strange and more feminist than its predecessor. Ms Hanawalt is already famous for drawing horses, but it is her birds that are her most richly realised characters. “Tuca & Bertie” is available on Netflix now