WHEN AUDREY HEPBURN died in 1993, newspapers’ obituaries often mentioned the unusual lilt of her voice. The New York Times noted that she spoke with the “trace of a European accent”, “a hint of mischief”. Cecil Beaton, in the Telegraph, described her “singsong cadence that develops into a flat drawl ending in a child-like query”: he thought it had “the quality of heartbreak”. The Los Angeles Times said that “her melodic, hard-to-place accent and haunting beauty captivated audiences and helped win her the Academy Award as best actress”. Clearly Hepburn’s voice was part of her charm, but its precise sound is hard to capture on the page and hard for the reader to imagine. That is why, 26 years later, Mo Rocca has retold Hepburn’s story, this time in a different medium. On his new podcast, “Mobituaries”, the journalist dedicates 40 minutes to the movie star, tracing her life from her birth in Belgium in 1929, through her film career to her humanitarian work. The episode is interspersed with clips from “Funny Face” and “Breakfast at Tiffany’s”; there is room for her dreamy, melancholic rendition of “Moon River” (pictured). The voices of those who knew her, or who admired her work, are also included. The late Nora Ephron is recorded in an interview from 2011 gushing over Hepburn’s grace and beauty, saying that “there was no one like her, ever”.  Free from the demands of the news agenda, “Mobituaries” eulogises individuals, characters and things (one episode contemplates “Neanderthals: death of a human species”; another “Death of a tree: roots of a rivalry”). It is experimental in form—each episode is an unusual blend of interviews, animated discussion, clips and music—and a way for Mr Rocca to explore subjects that intrigue him. He is astute when picking those subjects. Only a podcast, for instance, could demonstrate the skill of Vaughn Meader, an impersonator of John F. Kennedy. The episode considers Meader’s rise to fame, what his career was like during the 12 months of Kennedy’s presidency, and what happened after the assassination in November 1963. It includes clips from “The First Family”, a hit album which launched Meader to stardom, as well as snippets of later interviews where he expressed exasperation—sadness, almost—at being asked to do “the voice”. Musicians, too, are a natural fit for the airwaves and Sammy Davis Jr., a talented singer and impressionist, is eulogised in the fifth episode. The featured interviewees maintain that it was the emotion Davis conveyed in his music that made his performances so special. The listener hears it for themself: Mr Rocca juxtaposes clips of the same song, performed first by Davis and then by another artist. The difference is surprising. Elsewhere, Mr Rocca pursues more abstract discussions. An episode on deaths in sitcoms focuses on three types of death: the death of love for a character, a change of actor playing a character and the death of a character within the plot. Mr Rocca explores the phenomenon of “Chuck Cunningham syndrome”, whereby a character simply disappears (named after a figure in “Happy Days” who suffered that fate), with Alan Sepinwall, chief television critic for Rolling Stone. Clips of dialogue from a number of shows support the discussion, but it is interviews that allow the listener to understand the impact of such passings. Lila Garret, a writer on “Bewitched”, laments that they had to replace actor Dick York due to his poor health. Decades on, Jamiee Foxworth expresses disbelief at her character being written out of “Family Matters” in 1992. None of this is to say that the written obituary has been left behind—a writer’s career, for example, is best weighed up in words, and the ambiguity of language can be useful—but Mr Rocca shows how some stories are enriched by sound. It makes for compelling listening. Note: The Economist, as well as running an obituary every week in print, also features them on occasion in “The Intelligence”, our daily podcast