IN 2018, when Jair Bolsonaro won Brazil’s presidential election, outside observers feared that his proposed public-spending cuts would hurt the country’s creative sector—particularly the film industry, which relies on state funding and tax incentives. Mr Bolsonaro has already subsumed the ministry of culture into a more general “ministry of citizenship”, but the full effects of his policies are yet to be felt. The country is currently enjoying a robust presence at the Cannes film festival, with five movies chosen for the “official selection”. The most interesting and prominent is “Bacurau”, a Western which had its premiere on May 15th. It deploys the conventions of survivalist and militaristic action films to criticise not just Brazil’s current leadership, but all those in power with authoritarian tendencies. Set in the near future, “Bacurau” opens in a fictional separatist and self-sufficient town of that name in Brazil’s mountainous interior. The inhabitants live mostly in harmony, sharing resources, paying their respects when a beloved elderly matriarch dies and taking it in turns to keep watch over the only road to the outside world. The early scenes are realistic and richly drawn, with petty squabbles and rekindled love affairs; more unusual is that the local folk routinely take psychotropic drugs, which do not produce any obvious hallucinations but do seem to heighten the senses and bind the community together. “Make the most of life,” one elder proclaims, “for as long as we have life.”  For how long will that be? The mayor of the surrounding region, a flashy strongman type named Tony Jr. (Thardelly Lima), has cut off Bacurau’s water supply in a bid to assert control. He rolls through the small town as part of his election campaign, bearing “gifts” like a truck full of second-hand books which are dumped into the dirt. Then comes a larger conspiracy to literally erase Bacurau from the map—as its inhabitants discover when they try to find their home on Google and GPS systems—and soon mobile phones lose signal, too. Most ominous is the arrival in Bacurau of a paramilitary group. Tellingly, they hail not from Brazil but from America. They could be hired mercenary forces or, as their amateurish behaviour indicates, tourists who want to hunt humans for sport. But the distinction hardly matters: they behave as racist psychopaths, lusting for blood and taking pleasure in their kill counts. When they can’t find anyone else to shoot, they shoot each other. Although “Bacurau” was in the works for a decade before Mr Bolsonaro’s election, the film’s content became more extreme as Brazil’s political climate darkened, to match an atmosphere that Kleber Mendonça Filho and Juliano Dornelles, the film-makers, have described as “like a dystopia”. The president has said that left-wing “outlaws” should “be banished from our homeland”, but “Bacurau” makes heroes of outlaws, redefining the relationship between individuals, their homeland and the nation that claims them. Such themes are familiar from Mr Filho’s two previous narrative features, “Neighboring Sounds” (2012) and “Aquarius” (2016), which told stories of opposition to the encroachment of modernity in the Brazilian coastal community of Recife. “Bacurau” is less driven by human drama, preferring as it does the surreal violence of a genre movie. Once the villagers take up arms—energised by their pharmaceuticals—the film has the feel of “Red Dawn” if it were set in the fictional town of Macondo from Gabriel García Márquez’s “One Hundred Years of Solitude”. In order to respond to the existential threats, the community mines its own history for battle tactics and weaponry (a key scene features the local museum). “Bacurau” tells a globalised audience as much as a Brazilian one that victory over tyranny must come from within.