LAST WEEK J.R.R. Tolkien’s estate announced that it did not “authorise, or participate in the making of” a new biopic of the author. This statement may have more to do with the estate’s tight grip on its lucrative intellectual property—an authorised “Lord of the Rings” prequel is in production by Amazon—than with any objection to the way in which “Tolkien” portrays its subject. The first English-language film to be directed by Dome Karukoski, a Finnish film-maker, its account of John Ronald Reuel’s childhood and young adulthood is as respectful as his relatives could have possibly wished—and a little more respectful than the viewer might have wanted. As in most artists’ biopics, all sorts of themes and images from the aspiring novelist’s best-known work are there to be spotted in his formative years. Skipping past his early childhood in Africa, “Tolkien” begins its narrative as Ronald (Harry Gilby) is living with his brother and his widowed mother in Sarehole: a rural idyll which, it seems, will be the model for the Shire of his fiction. The family then moves to industrial Birmingham, and its dark satanic mills resemble the orcs’ forges in Peter Jackson’s film adaptations of “The Lord of the Rings”.  When the boys’ myth-recounting mother dies, Ronald (played in his teens and beyond by Nicholas Hoult) goes to the upper-crust King Edward’s School, where a group of like-minded friends teach him about fellowship. Then it is off to Oxford, and then to the first world war, where he has visions of dragons and knights amid the mud and mustard gas. He treks through the trenches with the help of a faithful sergeant named Sam (the viewer is supposed to believe that this is where the character of Sam Gamgee came from). Along the way, Ronald has an on-off romance with another orphan, Edith (Lily Collins), who encourages him to tell stories, instead of just making up languages. The narrative finishes exactly where you would expect, with Ronald dipping a nib in an inkpot and, in that instantly recognisable font, penning the opening sentence of “The Hobbit”. As authors’ lives go, Tolkien’s was eventful, and the connections between his biography and work aren’t as tenuous as they are in so many biopics. The problem is that Ronald himself is presented as such a goody-goody. He loses his Oxford scholarship after a wild night out, but only because he took the rap for the friends who led him astray. Earlier, when he makes a hash of his Oxford entrance exam, his failure is a direct result of his having taken Edith to her favourite Wagner opera the night before. “You were seen coming out of Edith’s room at midnight,” growls the priest (Colm Meaney) who is his legal guardian. “We were talking,” protests Ronald—and knowing him, he probably was. Whether or not the real Tolkien was as innocent as his screen self, he comes across as an insipid hero. Mr Hoult plays him with pained sensitivity, but he is so mild-mannered that his most reckless act of rebellion is to look on quietly as Edith throws a sugar cube onto a nearby lady’s hat. If he has any anger or resentment about the deaths of his parents, his subsequent internment in a snobby school, or his part in a conflict that claimed the lives of several friends, he is far too polite to let it show. Rather than emphasising the multiple bereavements, the traumas of war, and even the pain of his separation from Edith, David Gleeson and Stephen Beresford’s screenplay concentrates on Ronald’s inspiring chats with his chums, the so-called Tea Club and Barrovian Society. This is a disappointingly safe tack to take, but if you view “Tolkien” as a wholesome children’s film, it makes a lot more sense. “Tolkien” offers teenage and pre-teen audiences an intelligent, well-appointed guide to the author and his world, while celebrating a youthful enthusiasm for literature, music, friendship and love—and there is nothing wrong with that. Older viewers, though, may wish that the film had included something—anything—that was dark, challenging or scandalous enough to upset the author’s estate. “Tolkien” is released in Britain on May 3rd and in America on May 10th