ACROSS MANY parts of the Christian world, soothing and well-worn sermons were preached on May 12th about the indispensable role of women in upholding the faith: it was, after all, Mother’s Day in many countries. But in Münster, a bastion of German Catholicism, a somewhat different female voice was raised. Catholic women in that city have been co-ordinating a nationwide, week-long “strike” to back their demand for greater female participation in the life of the church, and other reforms. The protest, which involves staying away from Mass, holding outdoor services and withdrawing voluntary labour from church institutions, has been dubbed “Maria 2.0”. Its banner is a picture of the Virgin Mary with her mouth sealed by sticking-plaster, implying that she has been unfairly silenced. Organisers say the strike, which ends on May 18th, has won support in 100 locations across Germany, and messages of solidarity from other Teutonic places like Austria and Switzerland. “Many words [on this subject] have been exchanged and then disappeared into thin air, and now it is time for a different kind of protest,” one of the prime movers, Andrea Voss-Frick, told a local broadcaster.  The women want quicker progress to a reasonable gender balance in the management posts that are open to lay people; they have been promised a 30% quota by 2023. More controversially, they want their gender to be admitted to the “ordained ministry”. This ultimately means becoming priests, and at a minimum implies being accepted to the slightly lower but still important rank of deacon. They want the rule requiring priests to be celibate to be scrapped. One of their complaints against the celibate male priests who now dominate the church is that even where they are not directly responsible, they have mismanaged and covered up the problem of clerical abuse of minors. The protest has thrown into sharp relief some dilemmas faced by Catholicism in the prosperous Western places which used to be the faith's principal locus, before the centre of gravity started shifting to the developing world. Given that the Catholic faith is a global body with a single leader, the German Catholic church cannot act unilaterally over sensitive matters like ordination and gender, but it cannot ignore pressure from its most dynamic members either. As Thomas Bremer, a professor of ecumenical theology at Münster University puts it: “[The protests are] an indication of the common mood in the mainstream Catholic church in Germany and the bishops will have to relate to it somehow....[given that] the people who took part in these actions, or sympathised, are also the ones who are most active in the church and keep its structures alive." Nobody, however, should expect a revolution. Pope Francis all but admitted last week that the church’s internal deliberations over female deacons (let alone female priests) were deadlocked. He said a commission which has been examining whether there had been such a thing as ordained deaconesses in the early church had failed to reach any agreed conclusion. Conservatives (including the most conservative of Germany's bishops) argue that ordained female deacons clearly did not exist in the early Christian era, and they should not exist now, because that would imply rejecting God's revelation to the world through Jesus Christ and his immediate followers. Indeed at least one German bishop has taken the hard-line view that early Christianity differed from other religions of its time in not having female celebrants of its most important rites. This implies that the male monopoly was a conscious choice, not just a cultural reflex. Francis has assured traditionalists that he takes their arguments seriously, but he has cited the shift in Catholic thinking over the death penalty (from conditional acceptance to total rejection) as an example of how “divine revelation” can find new interpetations in a changing world. But that kind of logic is exactly what conservatives find flawed in the current pontiff's thinking, and some are determined to restrain his reforming instincts. The immediate reaction of senior German Catholics to the week-long protest has laid bare the church’s internal divisions . The two mainstream organisations of Catholic women have voiced understanding for the protest. The Bishops’ Conference has expressed willingness to give a sympathetic hearing but lamented the form of protest chosen. At least one bishop, Franz-Josef Bode, and many ordinary priests have said the protest is on balance something to be welcomed. Germany, however, still has plenty of conservative prelates. One, Bishop Rudolf Voderholzer, has said it is a waste of time and energy to consider any changes to the celibate male priesthood. German-speaking Europe is emerging as an arena for intra-Catholic conflict. Although declining, the German Catholic church is not in freefall, as it seems to be in other parts of western Europe, such as France and even Ireland. In 2017, the number of Catholics in Germany inched downwards by 270,000 to 23.3m but they remain the country's largest religious group. Among, for example, upwardly-mobile Catholics born to Irish or east European parents in England, the typical response to abuse scandals or other disappointments has been to give up on the church. In Germany, a significant percentage of Mass-goers, including some well-educated and articulate women, are determined to stay and fight for change. This will not be the last cry of protest from women in the Catholic church.