“I can’t wait to go to my newsroom,” Wa Lone told a crowd of reporters as he walked free of Insein prison in Yangon, Myanmar’s biggest city. Mr Wa Lone and Kyaw Soe Oo, who work for Reuters news agency, were released on May 7th. The pair were convicted in September 2018 of breaking the Official Secrets Act and received a seven-year sentence. They had served 511 days before being released as part of an amnesty of over 6,000 prisoners to mark the country’s New Year holiday. From the beginning, the case against the journalists was absurd. The pair had been working on an investigation into the killing of ten men from the Rohingya Muslim minority in Rakhine state, where soldiers forced more than 700,000 Rohingyas to flee to Bangladesh in 2017, murdering a further 7,000 or so. The government never denied that the killings took place and last year convicted ten soldiers for their role in them.  The trial of the two journalists was a farce, orchestrated by the military. The pair were alleged to have broken a law dating back to the colonial era. The defence argued that they were entrapped by police who invited them to dinner, handed them state documents, and arrested them shortly afterwards. One officer admitted to burning his notes of the arrest; another policeman said they had been ordered to set up the journalists. A third was caught consulting notes written on his hand when testifying against the pair. Nevertheless, Mr Wa Lone and Mr Kyaw Soe Oo were sentenced, much to the dismay, in particular, of Western governments. They saw it as yet another symptom of Myanmar’s failure to reform itself, even under the de facto leadership of Nobel Peace prize winner Aung San Suu Kyi, head of the ruling National League for Democracy party. Activists held the case up as an example of the continuing oppression of human-rights. Every new legal appeal made front-page news in Myanmar. Diplomats pleaded with government officials for the journalists’ release. But despite all the pressure, Ms Suu Kyi refused to intervene, arguing that she could not interfere with the judicial process. Two weeks ago the journalists had their third and final appeal rejected. That meant that all legal avenues to free the journalists had been exhausted. A pardon, which leaves court rulings intact, allows Ms Suu Kyi to make a small but attention-grabbing concession to the West, while not being seen to backtrack. Indeed, the journalists’ release certainly does not indicate any change of heart by the government. Under Ms Suu Kyi freedom of expression in Myanmar is being severely curtailed. A report released in January by Human Rights Watch, an NGO, found that a piece of loosely worded legislation which was supposed to regulate the telecoms sector is being used to crackdown on journalists and silence government critics. Since the National League for Democracy took power in 2016, about 140 cases have been brought under this law, many of which are baseless. Scores of reporters still languish in prison. Many of those who remain free now feel compelled to self-censor. The situation, sadly, is all too reminiscent of journalism under the old military regimes. Thus freeing Mr Wa Lone and Mr Kyaw Soe Oo is part of a “balancing act”, argues Gerard McCarthy of Australian National University. Ms Suu Kyi must weigh the preferences of Western governments, previously her strongest backers, against many Burmese, who think that the two journalists betrayed their country by appearing to side with the hated Rohingya. Objections from this constituency, and the generals, will be assuaged by the fact that 6,000 other prisoners were freed at the same time. The release of the two journalists is a welcome gesture, but a small one.