FOR A long time, translators had a hard time of it. They were underpaid and under-recognised by the literary establishment, rarely mentioned in reviews of the titles they worked on. But as foreign fiction has gained popularity—according to Nielsen BookScan, a data provider, Britons spent £20.7m ($26.6m) on it in 2018, up from £16.9m in 2014—so too has the profile of translators increased. In 2016 the Man Booker prize announced that its International award, of £50,000, would be shared by author and translator. The National Book Awards in America reintroduced a category for translated literature last year. That prize money, of $10,000, is also divided equally. As a result, a new breed of translator has emerged: confident, vocal and media-savvy. Jennifer Croft, who won the Man Booker International prize last year for her translation of Olga Tokarczuk’s “Flights”, is one such figure: she began translating Ms Tokarczuk’s work while still studying at the University of Iowa, and has written extensively about translation in the press and in her own publication, the Buenos Aires Review. There’s also Sophie Hughes, a former translation correspondent for Dazed & Confused magazine, whose work on “La Resta” (“The Remainder”), Alia Trabucco Zerán’s novel, was shortlisted for the Man Booker International prize this year. Daniel Hahn, a translator of Portuguese, Spanish and French, is another prominent figure. His translation of Angolan writer José Eduardo Agualusa’s “A General Theory of Oblivion” was shortlisted for the Man Booker in 2016 and won the International Dublin Award.  Mr Hahn, who was raised in London by an Argentinian father and a Brazilian mother, started out as an author of non-fiction before realising that he was drawn to translation. He has worked on everything from Pelé’s autobiography to children’s picture-books. The first misapprehension about translators, Mr Hahn says, is that they are all brilliant linguists. “I think a lot of people assume that language familiarity is on a spectrum from knowing nothing to being fluent, and actually it’s a lot more complex and interesting than that. You can, as in my case, be a very good and comfortable consumer of a language and a very poor producer of that language.” It’s more important, he reckons, to be a subtle and intelligent writer of the language you are translating into than to possess perfect fluency. “I read Portuguese and Spanish very comfortably, I speak them badly, I can’t write them at all, because of the way I happened to acquire the languages. The same with French.” Each translator has their own approach to the work, though Mr Hahn describes his method as “not untypical”. He begins without first having read the book, “so the process of translating the novel is also that process of discovering what’s happening”. “It’s partly that I want to have the experience of the average reader, where you’re driven forward by wanting to know what happens next,” he says, “but it’s also the absolutely ideal way of faking being a writer, because I’m also starting from nothing and writing right through to the end without any doubt.” While Mr Hahn writes journalism and has several non-fiction books to his name, he says he never had any wish to write novels. “Translating becomes a sort of replicating of an idealised version of that writing experience, so that I can write a novel as if it’s from scratch, but I know it’s going to work because it’s been road-tested in another language. I’m constantly writing these great novels, which is an amazing privilege.” Yet the question of how much a translator “writes” the novel is a loaded one. Deborah Smith’s translation of Han Kang’s “The Vegetarian” won the Man Booker International Prize in 2016, but several journalists and academics criticised Ms Smith for what they saw as divergences from the original Korean (one study argued that 10.9% of the first part of the novel was mistranslated). Responding to the furore in the LA Review of Books, Ms Smith countered these accusations of undue “creativity” by stating that “since there is no such thing as a truly literal translation—no two languages’ grammars match, their vocabularies diverge, even punctuation has a different weight—there can be no such thing as a translation that is not ‘creative’.” Mr Hahn agrees that the idea of total fidelity to the original text is impossible. “I don’t think there’s any question that we want to be faithful,” he says, but “the question is what we are choosing to be faithful to. Sometimes you’re being faithful to the spirit of the book in ways that are quite profound and subtle and have very little to do with meaning.” But the act of translation is about alchemy, not inserting yourself into the text. “I have no self-expression that needs to be fulfilled through this process. That’s not how translation works,” he says. “I have a desire for someone else to be able to express themselves via me.” He translates, he says, in order to broaden readers’ horizons—“so that people can read this great book from Angola or Brazil or wherever”—and open up new literary possibilities. “Unless the reader learns Portuguese, they won’t be able to experience this wonderful book, and so I’m presenting it to them, just not with the same words.” The winners of the Man Booker International Prize 2019 will be announced on May 21st