SINCE 1924, a bronze statue of Robert E. Lee (pictured), the Confederacy’s top general and a brutal slave owner, has stood in a park in Charlottesville, Virginia. In August 2017, a crowd of white nationalists gathered in the pretty college town to protest against the city council’s plan to remove the statue. One of them drove a car into a group of counter-demonstrators, killing a young woman, Heather Heyer. President Donald Trump’s remark that there were “very fine people on both sides” of the protests was one of the lowest points of his presidency. Nearly two years later, a legal battle over the statue of Lee and one of another Confederate general, Thomas “Stonewall” Jackson, drags on. On April 25th, a judge ruled that the city council could not take the statues down because of a Virginian law that forbids authorities other than the state government from removing war memorials. While, “some people obviously see Lee and Jackson as symbols of white supremacy,” Richard E. Moore, a circuit judge wrote, and “others see them as brilliant military tacticians or complex leaders at a difficult time”, their views are irrelevant; the statues are war memorials and thus protected.  Opponents of the statues are understandably concerned. Don Gathers, former chairman of the city commission that recommended removing the statues, said he feared the ruling would embolden white supremacists, “to think they had won and to come back to Charlottesville”. The battle over Charlottesville’s Confederate statues echoes similar ones elsewhere. Since 2015, when a white supremacist, fond of posing for photos with the Confederate flag, slaughtered nine black churchgoers in South Carolina, there has been a concerted push to remove monuments to the Confederacy from public places across America. Proponents of the removal of such monuments point out that the majority of them were erected long after the Civil War, during the Jim Crow era of the early twentieth century. This, it is argued, makes them less war memorials than symbols of a defiant and reborn white supremacy. Their defenders often argue that, notwithstanding the spirit in which they were raised, the monuments are part of America’s heritage. This argument has been broadly successful. According to the Southern Poverty Law Centre, an advocacy group, over 100 Confederate symbols including flags and place names, have been removed from public places, but over 1,500, including over 700 monuments, remain. This is largely due to state laws, like Virginia’s. When in early 2017 Charlottesville’s city council voted to remove the statue of Lee, the Monument Fund, a local group, sued, citing a law, passed in 1904—in Richmond, capital of the Confederacy—against the removal of war memorials. After Ms Heyer’s murder, the council also voted to remove a statue of Jackson (erected in 1924) and the Monument Fund updated its lawsuit to include that. Other states have passed such laws more recently. In 2004, Mississippi passed a law banning the removal of monuments. It was followed in 2015 by North Carolina. In 2016 Tennessee made it more difficult for the state legislature to approve monuments’ removal. In 2017, Alabama passed legislation protecting memorials that had stood on public property for 40 years or more. In some cases, novel ways have been found around these laws. In Memphis, Tennessee, several Confederate statues came down after the city sold the two public parks in which they stood to a non-profit organisation for a mere $1,000 each. On other occasions the laws have been flouted. Last year protestors toppled “Silent Sam” a statue of a Confederate soldier at the University of North Carolina; the university chancellor then had the monument carted away before she resigned. The laws are also being challenged in the courts, sometimes with more success than in Virginia. In January, a judge in Alabama ruled that the state law violated the rights of citizens opposed to Confederate monuments; the attorney-general has said he will appeal. In Charlottesville, the legal wrangling will continue. As well as arguing that the statues of Lee and Jackson are not war memorials, the city council points out that the law did not originally apply to cities like Charlottesville, only to counties. (It was amended in 1997 to include cities.) The judge has yet to rule on that but the case may end up in the state’s Supreme Court. That legal battle aside, Charlottesville is likely to remain in the news. Last month Joe Biden, the current frontrunner for the Democratic nomination for president, made the violence there a central part of his official campaign launch. In his announcement video the former vice-president chastised Mr Trump for praising the white supremacists who chanted, “the same anti-Semitic bile heard across Europe in the 30s”. The president’s words, Mr Biden went on, “stunned the world and shocked the conscience of this nation”. In response, Mr Trump said he was defending those who had opposed the removal of the statue of Lee. “If you look at what I said, you will see that that question was answered perfectly,” Trump told reporters. “And I was talking about people who went because they felt very strongly about the monument to Robert E. Lee, a great general. Whether you like it or not, he was one of the great generals.” Mr Biden disputed this. “Hatred was on the march, and he knew it,” he said.