“BOHEMIAN RHAPSODY”, a biopic of Freddie Mercury and Queen, was almost as big a money-spinner as the band itself. A notoriously troubled production, the film nevertheless went on to gross nearly $700m worldwide, making it the sixth-most-lucrative film of 2018. It was nominated for four Oscars, including Best Picture and Best Actor, an award which was won by its star, Rami Malek. The producers of “Rocketman” will be hoping that this bodes well for their film, another non-fiction drama about a theatrical and hedonistic British pop sensation, this time Elton John. Indeed, after the original director of “Bohemian Rhapsody” left the project, Dexter Fletcher was called in to supervise the last few weeks of shooting—and “Rocketman” is directed by Mr Fletcher, too. Despite all the similarities, though, it would be astonishing if “Rocketman” sold anywhere near as many tickets as “Bohemian Rhapsody” did. That is not to suggest that it is a worse film. On the contrary, the main reason why this buoyant production may underperform is that it is bolder and less conventional, a full-blown musical rather than a biopic with songs. True, it ticks off all the usual scenes in the showbiz rise-and-fall genre—the meetings with key collaborators, the composing and recording of classic singles, triumphal concerts—but it does so with an impressionistic aplomb that “Bohemian Rhapsody” lacked. It discards realism in favour of razzmatazz, and slots in Mr John’s biggest hits as and when they suit the emotional arc of the story, whether the chronology is accurate or not.  “Rocketman” makes its intentions clear in its opening moments when the middle-aged Elton (Taron Egerton) struts down a corridor dressed as a bright orange devil, complete with bejewelled horns and feathery wings. He looks both heroic and utterly ridiculous, which is more or less how the film portrays him throughout. He sits down in a group therapy session and lists the many, many substances to which he is addicted. A counsellor asks him about his childhood, and we’re off: with terrific confidence and flair, Mr Fletcher stages a series of fantasy-tinged flashbacks which recount how a dumpy boy from suburban Middlesex named Reginald Dwight reinvented himself as a sequinned extrovert, how he became one of the world’s top-selling musicians, how he feared that being gay would result in a life of loneliness and how he sank into what the tabloids would call a “drugs hell”. (The film’s embrace of sex, drugs and swearing, incidentally, make “Bohemian Rhapsody” seem even more coy than it did already.) Mr Fletcher is the ideal man for the job. As well as helping out on “Bohemian Rhapsody”, he has directed one previous jukebox musical, “Sunshine on Leith”, and one comic biopic starring Mr Egerton, “Eddie The Eagle”. The film’s screenwriter, Lee Hall, is the perfect choice, too: he is best known for his “Billy Elliot” screenplay, about a young ballet dancer from the north of England, and for the subsequent stage musical he co-wrote with Mr John himself. Their decision to turn Mr John’s life into what is effectively a stage musical is what makes “Rocketman” such ebullient fun, but also what stops it being as moving or as credible as it might have been. Jamie Bell (who starred in “Billy Elliot”) is restrained and soulful as Bernie Taupin, Mr Elton’s long-time lyricist and close friend, but otherwise the film is as bombastic as Mr John’s songs and as garish as his pantomime costumes. Mr Egerton, who sings all the songs himself, brings the requisite gusto, humour and vulnerability, but he isn’t exactly subtle; John Reid (Richard Madden), Mr John’s manager and lover, is evil incarnate; Mr Dwight, his domineering father (Steven Macintosh), is a parody of English reserve. And although Mr John’s bad behaviour is hardly ignored, “Rocketman”, on which the man himself is an executive producer and his husband, David Furnish, is the producer, insists that its insecure hero is more sinned against than sinning. Still, these objections are probably beside the point. Nobody goes to see a musical about Elton John because they want nuance. They go because they want fireworks, and the film sets off plenty of those. If it had come out two years ago, it is “Rocketman” that would have exploded, and “Bohemian Rhapsody” would have fizzled out. “Rocketman” is released in Britain on May 22nd and in America on May 31st