IN MARCH the National released “You Had Your Soul With You”. Though the single was not exactly upbeat or cheery—witness the line, “You have no idea how hard I died when you left”—it was a little more up-tempo than some of the band’s previous work. Some fans wondered, and worried: would their new album be a departure from the group’s stock-in-trade brooding baritones and ballads? “I Am Easy to Find”, the band’s eighth studio album in 18 years, came out on May 17th and those fears were allayed. Not only has the National stayed in its melancholic mood (many of their early-to-mid-2000s peers have either disbanded or lightened up a little); “I Am Easy to Find” is also a magnificent LP that is both consistent with their oeuvre and subtly surprising.  That is not to say they haven’t changed at all since their self-titled debut album was released in 2001. They are no longer a group of guys who share a house in Brooklyn and mess around in a garage-turned-music-studio. “Take a bath and get high through an apple,” Matt Berninger, the frontman, sang in “So Far Around the Bend” (2009), along with a refrain that “now there’s no leaving New York.” But the band has left New York, and decamped to cities around the world, often with their wives and children. They spend long stretches apart to work on side projects. Some of these developments were evident on their last album, “Sleep Well Beast” (2017), on which they occasionally traded the break-up tracks for songs about the small and difficult moments in a long marriage. (Many of the band’s lyrics are co-written by Carin Besser, Mr Berninger’s wife.) “I Am Easy To Find” is notable in featuring so many female voices. Gail Ann Dorsey, who collaborated with David Bowie for decades, sings on a number of tracks. She carries “Hey Rosey”, a song about dangerous and painful love, as Mr Berninger provides a melodic counterpart; the blend of their two voices makes it a nearly perfect song. Elsewhere on the album, vocalists including Sharon Van Etten, Kate Stables, Mina Tindle and Lisa Hannigan drift in and out to powerful effect. (The band’s decision to collaborate with women has strangely been attributed to #MeToo by critics, but the National credits the development to the vision of Mike Mills, a producer who has also made a short film to complement the project.) Songs like “So Far, So Fast” are experimental in a way that suits the group: strange, synth-heavy, occasionally choral. (The Brooklyn Youth Chorus sings one song in full, and appears throughout the album). Not all these forays in new directions work: the song “Not In Kansas” strives too hard to be political, and is ambling and musically stilted. But the album is memorable for gems such as “Quiet Light”, which sounds a lot like the band fans know well. Mr Berninger croons, “I’m not afraid of being alone/ I just don’t know what to do with my time” with a familiar mix of ennui and angst. The album deserves to be listened to in one sitting. What the National has managed to maintain—both rarely and beautifully—is a mood. How to describe that mood? Perhaps in dissociated images that have only a little to do with their lyrics: New England highways in November paved with ice; candlelight and marijuana smoke; crumpled-up letters; long lonely walks in early spring; last kisses. Their mood is not so much despair as it is simply sadness, of a bittersweet, poignant and powerful kind. It is a feeling that has enough shades to keep people listening all these years on.