WAR-ZONES ARE often more ordinary than you expect. So it was recently when I made my first trip to Afghanistan. As we pulled out of Hamid Karzai airport in Kabul and onto the highway my taxi driver turned to me and said that “the worst thing” about life in Afghanistan is the traffic. What about the war, I asked? Oh, yes, sure, sometimes bombs go off, he replied. And the security everywhere is a pain (we had just driven through about half a mile of checkpoints and blast walls). But bombs rarely inconvenience, whereas traffic, that happens every day. From abroad, it is easy to imagine Afghanistan to be everywhere as we see it on the evening news: soldiers clambering aboard helicopters; men in turbans clutching rifles; women in baby-blue burqas sheltering behind bombed out walls. You can find all of those things, certainly. But they are not what you are most likely to see. Kabul most of the time feels like what it is: another poor, traffic-choked South Asian city. Traffic is not Kabul’s only problem. The city, with a population that could be as high as 5m people now, is fringed by the mountains of the Hindu Kush, which trap the smoke from the fires people burn to keep warm in the winter, not to mention pollution from traffic and brick kilns near the city. When I arrived, it was still cold, the very tail end of winter, and the soot gets stuck in your lungs and your clothes, giving you the smell of someone who has been at a bonfire.  Although Afghanistan is home to one of the deadliest wars in the world, more people die from air pollution each year than do from the fighting—around 17,000 in 2016, according to the World Health Organisation, compared with around 3,500 civilian deaths from the war that year. Thankfully it is seasonal. As the weather changes, suddenly the air becomes clear again and Kabul becomes rather pleasant. Men on side streets grind sugar cane into juice. The city is given some glamour by wedding halls, lit up like casinos, where wealthier Kabulis get married. On Fridays, the day of rest, boys take over roads to play cricket in their kurtas and salwar kameez. Daily life in Afghanistan continues away from the buzzing helicopters. Sadly, most of the foreigners who work in Afghanistan don’t get to see much of that side of the country, because they are not often allowed out of their diplomatic compounds except under heavy protection. The part of Afghanistan known to most visitors as the “green zone” is nothing like the rest of the city. Concrete blast walls four metres high, topped with barbed wire and surrounded with HESCO blocks—giant wire-framed sandbags—surround everything. There is very little traffic, and at every junction, soldiers man roadblocks and check cars for explosives. The American embassy compound is Ozymandian in its size; it occupies the entirety of what must have once been a city neighbourhood. Soon, it will have to find some tenants, as the American government is pulling out half of its staff. The security is necessary, because both the Taliban and Islamic State like to drop rockets and send suicide bombers to this part of the city. Most of the staff of embassies can travel around the city only in armoured cars with armed guards. So I had the funny experience of interviewing people who, even though they knew far more than me about the details of Afghan politics, had seen less of the country. It cannot be good that decisions about policy are made by people who are scarcely allowed outside the blast walls. So much of the West’s failure to build a stable Afghanistan comes down to the reliance on a distorted vision of the country that exists only in compounds like this: a world in which the Taliban are a clearly defined group, for example, rather than a messy, ever-changing alliance. But what is the alternative? Earlier this month Taliban fighters bombed the offices of Counterpart International, an American NGO that works outside the green zone. Foreigners hiding away hurts the economy, too. Not far from the diplomatic quarter in Kabul is Chicken Street, a delightful, pedestrianised corner of the city lined with shops selling carpets, antiques and leather goods. For a while its vendors made a good living from the crowds of foreigners based in Kabul. In one emporium, the owner had a complete selection of Victorian flintlock cavalry pistols for sale, the steel embossed with Queen Victoria’s crest. “All fake”, the seller informed me, enthusiastically, “but very good fake”, demonstrating the smooth action of the trigger. Nowadays there are very few customers for such trinkets. As the NATO military presence has wound down in Afghanistan, so too has the spending—and the opportunities for Afghans to get rich working as translators, drivers and suppliers. Still, for all of the catastrophe of the war there are still some positive legacies. For the capital of such a poor country, Kabul has good roads and a surprisingly reliable electricity supply. There is a small but real middle class, and freedoms unimaginable in the 1990s when the Taliban were in charge. In cafes in western Kabul, you can find women in jeans flirting with their boyfriends over sickly-sweet desserts. Everyone has a mobile phone, from which to happily blast Hindi pop music. Even if the Taliban come back, which sadly now is an all too likely outcome, not all of this will be undone. The country has changed too much. Almost half of the population now were born after the American invasion. Four times more people live in Kabul than in the 1990s. Far more Afghans know of life beyond the traditional confines of the Pashtun village, the inspiration of the Taliban, to go back. That is the optimistic thought, anyway. In the countryside around Kandahar I also visited schools where boys—and only boys—recite Quranic verses in classrooms where the walls were riddled with bullet holes. In the past, both the Taliban and Nato-backed forces had taken over the buildings to use as military outposts. Since then, no repairs had been done. Some girls do go to school, but not many. Parents ask why they should risk the shame of sending a girl to school when the education available is so pathetic anyway? Not all change is easy.