THE GRASS has been cut, the squares prepared. The advertising posters are up and 95% of the 800,000 tickets have been sold. The 12th Cricket World Cup begins in England this week and will conclude, somewhat laboriously, in a final on July 14th. Each of the ten teams will play each other in a round-robin league, with the top four in the table qualifying for the semi-finals. As usual, the matches are one-day internationals (ODIs), in which each team gets 50 overs (or 300 balls) with the bat—longer than the T20 format, which gives each side 20 overs, but shorter than Test matches, which last five days. The number of fixtures and the increasingly aggressive batting tactics used by most teams makes it likely that more international runs will be scored in the next month than in any that came before. But another historic milestone also looms on the horizon. The English, who invented the game but have never won the World Cup, might finally break that duck. Bookmakers reckon they are the favourites, with roughly a 30% chance of victory.  For most of the tournament’s 44-year history, the “Poms” (as they are called by their Australian tormentors, who have won it five times) have been useless. They last reached a final in 1992. At the previous tournament in 2015, the only teams they managed to beat were lowly Scotland and Afghanistan. They were eliminated at the earliest opportunity. Their defeat by hosts New Zealand was one of the most comprehensive sporting losses imaginable, with the Kiwis surpassing England’s paltry 123 runs in just 12 overs and two balls. But during the past four years England have focused relentlessly on avenging themselves at the tournament. Shortly after the debacle in 2015, the England and Wales Cricket Board (ECB) appointed Trevor Bayliss, a head coach who specialises in cricket’s short formats. Mr Bayliss threw out the core of the old squad and rebuilt the team in the image of Eoin Morgan, its Irish-born captain and one of its most aggressive batsmen. Mr Bayliss’s changes have been twofold. The first has been to pick hard hitters who were previously considered too inconsistent. At the top of the order are Jonny Bairstow and Jason Roy, who drifted around the edges of the England set-up before 2015, but have now matured into the fastest-scoring opening pair in ODI history. Supporting them in the middle order is Ben Stokes, a brawny all-rounder who was omitted from the last World Cup squad after a poor run of form with the bat. The coach’s second change has been to encourage the batsmen who survived his cull in 2015 to swing even harder for the boundary rope (see chart, above). Alongside Mr Morgan, the core of the side is now occupied by Jos Buttler, one of cricket’s most innovative hitters, and Joe Root, the Test captain, who offers something of a cooler head. In the last four years, all three have scored their runs at least 10% more quickly (on a per-ball basis) than they did in the previous four years. Where England once considered a total of 300 runs a good score, the team now looks for 350 or more. It was a measure of how eagerly the players bought into Mr Bayliss’s philosophy that in June 2015, just two months after the World Cup, they beat New Zealand 3-2 in an ODI series, registering scores of 408, 365 and 350. At the start of this World Cup, England hold the number-one ranking in ODI cricket and the world record for the highest score (481 against Australia last year). In 2019 so far they have scored boundaries—six runs if the ball is hit over the rope without bouncing, four runs if it touches the turf—40% more frequently than the average ODI team. All of which raises the question: why doesn’t every team wield the willow so aggressively? The answer is that doing so carries considerable risk, because hitting with reckless abandon increases the chance that a shot will be caught by a fielder, resulting in a wicket. England have enough capable sloggers in the team, including several bowlers, to get away with this perilous strategy most of the time. But occasionally it backfires spectacularly, with every single batsman getting himself out. In the last year England have endured the two biggest defeats in their history. In October their total of 132 runs was 219 less than Sri Lanka managed in their innings, and in March the West Indies passed England’s score of 113 in just 12 overs and one ball. Even more worrying for English fans is a dearth of top-notch bowlers. Whereas the country has five of the world’s 20 highest-rated ODI players with the bat, it only has two of the top 20 with the ball: Chris Woakes and Adil Rashid. But although they both take a lot of wickets they also give away lots of runs. In fact, England’s bowlers are so leaky that the ECB has relaxed the eligibility criteria in order for Mr Bayliss to select Jofra Archer, a Barbadian who has a British passport but has only lived in the country for three years. He bowls more quickly than any of England’s other options, and has honed his skills by playing in T20 leagues around the world. The hosts will need him to translate that success to ODIs if they are to win. The real sultans of swing and spin are India. The team is synonymous with Virat Kohli, its captain and the world’s highest-rated batsman. But they are most dangerous with the ball in hand, since the squad contains three of the eight best bowlers at the competition: Jasprit Bumrah, a seamer with an unusual number of tricky variations and the courage to use them, and Kuldeep Yadav and Yuzvendra Chahal, two wrist-spinners who move the ball unpredictably off the pitch. The flat wickets that the hosts have prepared might make the World Cup a run-fest, with some commentators expecting the first ever score of 500. But India will do better than most in restraining their opponents’ hitting. Australia offer the other main threat to England’s hopes. The defending champions have endured a dismal couple of years, exacerbated by the suspension of former captain Steve Smith and his deputy, David Warner. The pair were caught rubbing the ball with sandpaper to make it swing more in the air, an offence that is beyond the pale in cricket, but have now served their bans. They were roundly booed by English spectators in a warm-up game against the hosts on May 25th, an unusual occurrence in the sport—and promptly scored 159 runs between them while guiding their team to victory. Perhaps England will be able to pile 400-odd runs on their old rivals later this month, when it really counts. But there would be no sensation more familiar for cricket fans than the Poms self-destructing and the Aussies spoiling the party.