IN 2016, Donald Trump said Roe v Wade, the 1973 abortion-rights ruling, would “automatically” be overruled by justices he would appoint to the Supreme Court. Three years later, with two of his picks in robes and a surge of challenges to Roe flying to the court, abortion-rights supporters fear Mr Trump’s prediction may be close to coming true. But, so far, every time a reckoning on Roe seems imminent, the Supreme Court has taken a step back. Abortion rights are in trouble, but it seems that the conservative justices on the nation’s highest court (with the notable exception of Clarence Thomas) are content to plod along rather than rush headlong into a decision that could spark a dangerous new flashpoint in the culture wars. While states like Georgia and Alabama have been passing alarmingly extreme abortion bans that are flatly out-of-line with Roe, the Supreme Court has been considering whether to take Box v Planned Parenthood of Indiana and Kentucky, a case involving a more insidious type of anti-abortion law. Box concerns HEA 1337, which Mike Pence, now the vice-president, signed into law in 2016 when he was governor of Indiana. In a Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals ruling last year, two of the law’s provisions were deemed unconstitutional: a requirement that fetal remains from abortions be buried or cremated; and a bar on abortions motivated solely by the fetus’s race, sex or diagnosed disability such as Down syndrome. The fetal-remains provision lacks a rational basis, the Seventh Circuit held, while the “non-discrimination” rule undermines Roe’s promise, reaffirmed in 1992 in Planned Parenthood v Casey, that states may place no “undue burden” on a woman’s right to end a pregnancy prior to viability, or about 24 weeks’ gestation. To prohibit women with particular motivations from aborting their fetuses is to impose “far greater than a substantial obstacle” on the constitutional right, the Seventh Circuit ruled. These limits are “absolute prohibitions on abortions prior to viability which the Supreme Court has clearly held cannot be imposed by the state”.  The justices decide which cases they will decide, and they can take as long as they like to “grant” or “deny” a so-called “petition for certiorari”. Box had been on the justices’ conference table since early January, and they have mulled over how to handle it at 14 private conferences. Finally, on May 28th, the court issued a curious ruling on Box. First, by a vote of 7-2, the justices reversed the Seventh Circuit on the fetal-remains question. Under the deferential standard employed at the appeals court, the justices noted in an unsigned opinion, states may regulate how aborted fetal tissue is disposed of. (The ruling left open whether the provision might fail the “undue burden” test from Casey, since it wasn’t litigated that way.) Second, by a 9-0 vote, the court declined to weigh in on the discrimination claim. Without saying a word on the controversy over aborting fetuses diagnosed with Down syndrome, the court simply observed that “[o]nly the Seventh Circuit has thus far addressed this kind of law” and pointed to Rule 10, according to which the justices generally stay on the sidelines when a legal issue has not “been considered by additional courts of appeals”. The brief 650-word opinion contrasts sharply with the hundreds of pages of briefs from pro-life organisations and religious groups urging the Supreme Court to save both parts of Indiana’s law. The surgical side-step, coming after months of deliberation, bears the fingerprints of Chief Justice John Roberts, the new median justice on a right-tilting court. Though Chief Justice Roberts worked against Roe as a lawyer in George W. Bush’s Justice Department and has voted to chip away at abortion rights, he has become keener to steer the court away from treacherous waters. With a baldly political light cast on the court in the Trump era—especially during last autumn’s explosive confirmation hearing for Brett Kavanaugh—the chief seems increasingly circumspect. He is loth to take on a controversy that would spring a 5-4 abortion decision on America just weeks before the parties’ national conventions in the summer of 2020. But Chief Justice Roberts did not construct this compromise by himself. On the left, he persuaded Justices Elena Kagan and Stephen Breyer to uphold the fetal-remains law—apparently by demurring on whether it might fail under a different litigation strategy. (Justices Sonia Sotomayor and Ruth Bader Ginsburg would have left in place the lower-court ruling against fetal-tissue rule.) On the right, the chief convinced his fellow conservatives to hold their fire on the Down syndrome provision. Justice Samuel Alito and Mr Trump’s two picks (Justices Kavanaugh and Neil Gorsuch) joined the per-curiam silently. Only Justice Clarence Thomas would not be restrained, penning a 20-page tirade associating women who choose to end their pregnancies with the eugenics movement of the 20th-century. Abortion is “rife with the potential for eugenic manipulation”, he wrote, and prenatal tests giving women information about fetal abnormalities add fuel to a moral travesty. The only reason Justice Thomas cited for not voting to take up Indiana’s appeal—and allowing the Down-syndrome provision to take effect—was the matter of Supreme Court procedure. “[F]urther percolation” in the lower courts, he wrote, “may assist our review of this issue”. That review, he hastened to note, should take place “soon”. Viewed alongside the court’s refusal in February to let anti-abortion clinic regulations go into effect in Louisiana—a move that surprised many observers—this court’s Solomonic ruling in Box signals a Supreme Court that is in no hurry to entertain serious challenges to Roe while a presidential campaign is underway. But abortion rights face a highly uncertain future in the hands of the justices in the medium term, and with prospects of another Supreme Court appointment for Mr Trump in the coming years, the pace toward a post-Roe reality could pick up.