THE TENTH MEMBER of the Chakri dynasty, which has ruled Thailand for more than two centuries, appeared initially in a pair of slippers. They matched a white robe, bordered in gold, which he donned for the first ritual of his coronation day on May 4th, initiating three days of celebrations. Almost exactly 69 years ago King Maha Vajiralongkorn’s more popular father, the late King Bhumibol Adulyadej, appeared similarly garbed for his own sequence of Buddhist and Hindu ceremonies. Then as now, a military regime ran the country. Ahead of a stage-managed election last month, King Vajiralongkorn made plain in public statements his desire for soldiers to continue running affairs. Thailand’s new monarch is a meddler.  So much for the similarities between father and son. In many ways, King Vajiralongkorn is unique. Preferring to live in Germany rather than Thailand, he spends little time in his own country. Scandal dogs him. After a string of abandoned consorts and seven children, news of his fourth marriage broke just days before his coronation. Since his father’s death in 2016 he has also amassed power. Last year it was announced that the assets of a royal investment portfolio—estimated to be worth around $40bn—would be considered his personal property. (He has agreed to pay tax on the haul.) The king has also reshaped the court and the Buddhist priesthood. His coronation day began with a purification ceremony at the royal residence in Bangkok. Holy water was poured over his head and dripped down his back. In preparation the liquid had been collected from 76 provinces, as well as from around Bangkok, in recent weeks. Courtiers and other bigwigs wore spotless white uniforms. They crawled up the steps leading to their seated monarch, bowing repeatedly when they got to the top. The dousing was probably quite pleasant: roasting temperatures would have made the more ornate outfits unbearably hot. After changing into an embroidered golden suit and coat for an anointing ceremony, the king was attended by some of the country’s most powerful figures. Those involved in the anointment rituals included the ancient head of his Privy Council and Prayuth Chan-ocha, the coup-leader who is Thailand’s current prime minister. Thanks to a rigged electoral system, the latter is all but guaranteed to hold onto office after the final results from the recent election are released in full this week—as long as that pleases his majesty, of course. While awaiting coronation the king received several ornate symbolic objects, including a sceptre, a sword, a fly whisk, a fan, a pair of golden shoes and “the great crown of victory”. Its crust of gold and diamonds brings its weight to more than 7kg, and not even respectful Thai cameramen could hide its awkward teetering. Once crowned, the king uttered his first pronouncement, which echoed that of his father, promising to reign with “righteousness” for the benefit of his people. Among the myriad other rites, particular excitement surrounds a grand procession that will take place on May 5th. It will see the king carried in public on his gilded palanquin through the streets of Bangkok. Given the huge crowds who camped for days to witness rituals associated with the cremation of King Bhumibol, the turnout for the procession will be a marker of King Vajiralongkorn’s popularity. Text messages urging Thais to attend have been delivered en masse. Thousands of civil servants and other officials have been bussed in for the long weekend. Thais have been encouraged to don yellow, the royal colour, over the coronation period, although a short trip on a local train reveals a lack of broad enthusiasm for this edict. There are some ardent monarchists, however. Standing close to the palace area, yellow-clad Surang Sri-ruang explains that she has travelled from Chiang Mai, a distant northern city, especially for the coronation. Her love of the late king necessitates her love of his son, she says. “It is a once-in-a-lifetime event that I really need to attend to express my loyalty.” Linda Wornkham, a businesswoman from Ayutthaya, an ancient former capital, agrees. “I’m so happy to be here,” she says. The king, for his part, looked stony-faced throughout the proceedings. If precedent is any guide, he will soon be on a flight back to Munich.