THE ECONOMIC reforms of Ronald Reagan in America and Margret Thatcher in Britain in the 1980s unleashed the power of the private sector for economic growth. The deregulation and privatisations that followed not only perked up their own economies, but became a template for reform in many other countries around the world, from Mexico to Russia. Yet did the pro-private sector, anti-state ethos go too far? In her book “The Value of Everything: Making and Taking in the Global Economy,” Mariana Mazzucato, an economist at University College London, argues that policymakers and the public have lost sight of government’s ability to create economic value. She believes that our understanding of the origins of value are misguided and that governments should be able to “explore, experiment and take risks” on behalf of the public.  That view is not shared by all, since government intervention brings the risk of politicising decisions that are better made by market forces. As part of The Economist’s Open Future project, we posed several questions to Ms Mazzucato about her ideas. It is followed by a short excerpt from the book, about how classical economists viewed the role of the state, from Smith to Marx—and what a “humble citizen” today might think. *       *       * An interview with Mariana Mazzucato The Economist: What constitutes economic value, and what do we know about how and when governments add it? Mariana Mazzucato: Value is “co-created” by different actors in the economy when they come together in productive ways to create new types of goods and services—each actor adding time and effort. While this process is well understood in business—that is what they teach in business schools—it is much less understood in the public sector. This is because policy is seen at best as fixing market failures, while in reality, policy has been most effective when it has actively co-created and co-shaped markets, not only fixed them: whether this was when the state provided the “investment of first resort” in the IT revolution, or the current role that public investments are playing in the green revolution, such as through the role of organisations like ARPA-E in America, but also of public banks like the KfW in Germany. In each of these cases, government had to have a vision for the future, and make the necessary investments that later crowded-in more risk-averse private firms. But the key question is “what is being created”? Is it war machines, or tools for an economy that is more sustainable and inclusive? Even fracking initially came from government investments. Once we admit the state can be transformational, the key question is how and what. The Economist: Governments can be too interventionist and make spending decisions that are driven by politics: can that realistically be curtailed? Ms Mazzucato: In order to co-create and co-shape markets the state must have the right organisational structure and capabilities. Yet there is a self-fulfilling prophecy that because there is a narrow framework to understand the role of government, there is also a poor understanding of what capabilities the state requires in order to be effective. This means there is under-investment. Indeed, the irony is that when the state does not understand its role in creating public value through public purpose, then it ends up being ineffective and crowding out, and being more easily captured. The Economist: You have written about sectors that extract value from the economy; rentiers like financial services and parts of big tech. Aren’t governments capable of being just as extractive? Ms Mazzucato: Yes, of course. Both public and private actors can be extractive. The problem is how to transform private and public organisations so that they are more purpose-driven—but also that their interactions are more symbiotic and less parasitic. Adam Smith said that free markets were about making markets free from rent—and that means looking at how to transform both public and private organisations so that they are adding not extracting. It also fundamentally changes how we understand public-private partnerships. The Economist: If society attributes too much value to sectors you regard as unproductive, such as financial services, is that not merely an expression of our collective priorities? Ms Mazzucato: There are strong narratives about value creation that have also enabled more extraction to happen. While there was plenty of value extraction by landlords in the 17th century, they did not pretend to be productive, creative or innovative. They just said: give me your money. Because there is a feedback between how we value things and how things work out in the real economy—what sociologists call “performativity”—we cannot pretend that the status quo is our collective interest. There is a lot of conning going on. I also argue that the mainstream theory of value being taught in economics departments worldwide is too subjective. It’s based on preferences such as “firms maximise profits”, “consumer utility” and “workers choosing between leisure and work”. So it becomes much harder to objectively differentiate profits from rents, which was a key distinction made by the classical economists like Smith, Ricardo and Marx. The Economist: Around the world, public trust in politicians is dismally low. Would the public support giving governments a more direct role in economic growth? Ms Mazzucato: The problem is not about giving governments more or less of a role. The problem is what kind of role. There is more corruption and capture when government sees its role as just subsidising, or providing different forms of guarantees and tax cuts—as opposed to investing ambitiously to create new opportunities. I have been a strong advocate for a mission-oriented approach to address the key challenges of our time—from climate change to healthy living. But key here is that the missions themselves should be co-created. No so much of a Kennedy-style moon-shot but more of different types of actors defining what a green transition might look like and then government using all it has at its disposal—from procurement to prize schemes—to crowd-in multiple solutions to “get there”. That is the lesson from the moon-shot: a clear goal; many different sectors, actors and disciplines coming together to solve the problem; all fuelled by hundreds of projects. Some may fail, so governments need to be willing to explore, experiment and take risks. But risks for the public good. *       *       * Government value in the history of economic thought Excerpted from “The Value of Everything: Making and Taking in the Global Economy” by Mariana Mazzucato (Penguin, 2018): Economics emerged as a discipline in large part to assert the productive primacy of the private sector. Starting with the French physiocrats, economists found that government was required for the orderly functioning of society and thus for setting conditions for the production of value. But in itself, government was not inherently productive; rather, it was a stabilizing background force. The physiocrats pleaded with King Louis XV to laissez-faire—not to micro-manage the economy by siphoning off as much gold as possible, and thereby upset the intricate mechanism by which value was really created—through productivity of the land, not by accumulating precious metal. According to Quesnay’s Tableau Économique, value produced in agriculture flowed through the economy. But government was absent, ‘unproductive’. As part of the ruling class, members of the government got a share of the value apportioned simply because they were in power. Nevertheless, Quesnay knew, the Tableau did not work by itself. There was something to be ‘governed’. Quesnay argued that the wealth of the nation could only be upheld through ‘“roper management by the general administration”—what we would call government regulation. He thought that free competition would best benefit the economy—but to achieve this, far from excluding government, he favoured an activist state that would break monopolies and establish the institutional conditions necessary for competition and free trade to flourish and value creation to thrive. Adam Smith, meanwhile, devoted the fifth book of his The Wealth of Nations to the role of government in the economy. His aim was not only to explain the prosperity of the nation, but also “to supply the state or commonwealth with a revenue sufficient for the public services.”. Like Quesnay, Smith believed the state was necessary. Indeed, he was convinced that national wealth could only be increased through division of labour in “a well-governed society”, in which he singled out three crucial functions of government: the military, the judiciary and other public services such as provision of infrastructure. These are public goods—producers cannot exclude anyone from consuming them. For Smith, such public goods had to be paid for by the state; some sort of taxation was therefore necessary. David Ricardo was perhaps the most anti-government of the classical economists. Although the title of his The Principles of Political Economy and Taxation contains a key activity of government (taxation), he never considered how taxation could allow government spending to encourage production and hence value creation. For Ricardo, taxes are the ‘“portion of the produce of land and labour, placed at the disposal of government” to spend on areas such as education. If these expenditures are too high, he writes, the capital of the country is diminished, and “distress and ruin will follow”. Ricardo never asks, as Smith did, whether some taxes are necessary to help capitalists carry out production. He assumes infrastructure—the judiciary and so on—as a given. In effect, Ricardo narrows the production of economic value strictly to the private sphere. Admiring Ricardo’s rigorous analytical arguments, in comparison with Smith’s more fluid and interdisciplinary philosophical and political approach, economists followed him and excluded government from the productive sector. Marx’s view of government, meanwhile, derived from his materialist view of history, whereby the organization of society (including government structures) reflects the economic system (which he called the mode of production) and the underlying social relations: the interaction between classes. So, in his view, under the capitalist mode of production—based on surplus value generated from exploitation of labour—government and law reflected the needs of capitalists. Marx ridiculed some followers of Smith and Ricardo for haranguing state officials as “parasites on the actual producers”, then realizing that they were after all necessary to support the capitalist system. Nevertheless Marx, like Smith before him, while stressing the necessity of some functions of the state, placed state officials in the category of unproductive labourers outside the production boundary. The capitalist class had an interest in maintaining the state in a position strong enough to guarantee the rule of law and advance their class interests—but nothing more than that: “The executive of the modern state is nothing but a committee for managing the common affairs of the whole bourgeoisie.” The question concerning Marx was what constituted the ‘right’ size of government to provide the necessary services without taking away any additional profits. While the neoclassical economists broke with the labour theory of value, they did not depart from their predecessors’ view that government was necessary but unproductive. Marginal utility, as we have seen, locates value in the price of any transaction that takes place freely in the market. According to this perspective, government produces nothing: it cannot create value. And government’s main source of income is taxes, which are a transfer of existing value created in the private sector. The immensely influential Alfred Marshall was quite nuanced in his discussion of economic life in his Principles, but still recommended that economics should avoid ‘as far as possible’ the discussion of matters associated with government. He believed that government interference in, or regulation of, the market would often happen in response to attempts by vested interests to rig the market in their favour (i.e. government would be ‘captured’ by such interests)—thus only hurting a particular competitor rather than benefiting society as a whole. To the humble citizen, however, it might not be so obvious that government does not create value. We have already seen three ways in which it does so: bailing out the banks; investing in infrastructure, education and basic science; and funding radical, innovative technologies which are transforming our lives. The crucial point is that many of these activities involve taking risks and investing—exactly what austerity doesn’t do—and in so doing they create value. But that value is not easily visible, for the simple reason that much of it goes into the pockets of the private sector. _______________ Excerpted from “The Value of Everything: Making and Taking in the Global Economy” by Mariana Mazzucato. Published by Penguin. Copyright © 2018 by Mariana Mazzucato. All rights reserved.