Under Red Skies. By Karoline Kan. Hachette Books; 320 pages; $27. Hurst; £20. CHAOQUN’S BIRTH was a rebellion. Her mother hid her coveted but illegal second pregnancy from officials and neighbours in her village. At the time, under China’s one-child policy, women who already had children were sterilised or forced to have long-term contraceptives surgically inserted. But Chaoqun slipped through the system’s cracks, and was born in 1989, just a few months before the protests that culminated in a military assault on Tiananmen Square. She grew up to work for the New York Times. Under her pen name, Karoline Kan, she has written the gripping autobiography of a generation—and a superpower—caught between tradition and ambition.  There are more Chinese millennials than there are people in America, but they rarely tell their own stories. Born during and after Deng Xiaoping’s push to replace a Marxist economy with market capitalism, they grew up amid relative abundance and burgeoning shopping malls. The backdrop of Ms Kan’s narrative is unprecedented economic growth, mass urbanisation and the cultural changes they engendered. It arcs from paddy fields to swanky Western parties in Beijing, taking in crowded rooms in the hutongs, narrow alleys in the older parts of northern Chinese cities. Like millions of others, Ms Kan’s mother wanted to move the family away from their village in search of a better life. Because of their rural hukou (household registration certificates that limit migrants’ access to services and work), it was hard to find a job in a city. But another crack appeared, when a relative asked the family to take over a private kindergarten. As a farmer’s daughter, Ms Kan had to prove herself worthy of a place in a city school. She was taught to behave, study for her gaokao, the college entrance exam, and not to think for herself. Yet when her teacher told the children to cry because of the death of “dear grandpa Deng Xiaoping”, she thought: how can I cry for a man I never knew? Later she spent two weeks undergoing junxun, basic military training that all university freshmen must complete. Ms Kan emerged even more sceptical of the system. She heard whispers and warnings about the bloodshed around Tiananmen, but it was never explained. When she discovered the truth, she cried sincerely. “China collapsed for me suddenly,” she writes. “I had no faith in what I had been brought up to believe.” As a student in Beijing, Ms Kan was exposed to foreign ideas. Thanks to an American lecturer’s encouragement, she became obsessed with learning English. In “Under Red Skies” she tells her story in straightforward English prose that still suggests her Chinese roots. For example, a romantic crush leads to a little deer roaming in her stomach, not butterflies. After graduation she found a job writing about Beijing for an English-language publication. Later she joined the Times as a researcher (the only journalistic role that Chinese citizens are allowed to perform for foreign media). Ms Kan carved her own path through a series of small rebellions. Her story shows that, for all the government’s efforts to suppress the sort of defiance that fuelled the Tiananmen protests, it cannot seal all the cracks through which China’s young people learn about the world.