THE TECHNOLOGY industry vaunts itself as a meritocracy. Yet it is roundly criticised for being unwelcoming to women, in ways large and small. In America, women hold just 25% of jobs in computing, and leave the tech and engineering sectors at twice the rate of men. The situation is worse for women of colour: black women hold only 3% of jobs among women in tech, and Latina women just 1% in America. The gender imbalance is a global problem. In Britain, for example, Europe’s main tech hub, just 15% of people working in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) fields are women. Only 5% of leadership positions are occupied by women.  In “Brotopia: Breaking up the Boys’ Club of Silicon Valley”, Emily Chang, a journalist at Bloomberg, explores the difficulties that women face. Start-up culture is often like a college fraternity house, which makes it hard for women to fit in, especially in senior management. Ms Chang recounts female engineers at Uber describing how they were invited to strip clubs by their male colleagues, for example. Meanwhile, female venture capitalists are scarce. As part of The Economist’s Open Future initiative, we asked Ms Chang about how the tech industry could be more hospitable to women, how the gender imbalance in venture capital could be redressed and how sexism in tech differs from other industries. Her answers appear after an excerpt from “Brotopia” on the ugly experiences faced by women in gaming. *       *      * Escape from Trolltopia: Women’s fight to save the internet Excerpted from “Brotopia: Breaking Up the Boys’ Club of Silicon Valley” by Emily Chang (Portfolio, 2018) Brianna Wu has been tormented by online trolls for three years. It started in 2014, when Wu spoke up to defend women in the gaming industry, only to find herself plunged into a roiling controversy called Gamergate that turned her life upside down. The threats of rape and murder hurled at her online became so scary that she and her husband fled their home. To this day, they live in a new location under an alias. But sometimes the trolls still manage to track her down, and online harassment becomes an off-line ambush. “They found our address and smashed a window of my house. Threw a brick right through it,” Wu told me in April 2017, when I reached her by phone at a number she instructed me never to share. At the time we spoke, the window was still shattered. The online attacks, like the one perpetrated on Wu, began and gathered force on sites like 4chan, Twitter, and Reddit, the largely unmonitored town halls of the web. All of these sites allow or encourage anonymity and pseudonymity, as well as a laissez-faire approach to free speech, in keeping with the long-standing libertarian ethos of the internet. All of them have tolerated years of online harassment of women. It should be of little surprise at this point that the sites that harbour the most vicious trolls—4chan, Twitter, and Reddit included—were all started and led by white men, who aren’t usually the targets of the most vicious online harassment. Would these sites be as hostile to women today if they had been built and run by women, or at least included a meaningful number of women leaders early on? The money in misogyny Few places on the internet are more troubled by misogynistic trolling than the world of online gaming. Gaming is a billion-dollar business— much bigger than movies and rivaling TV—including an exploding generation of mobile and social games, classic PC console games, and rising categories like e-sports and virtual reality. Yet the gaming industry is also saddled with a long-standing history of violence toward and degradation of women, allowing gamers to play out dozens of dark fantasies. One of the earliest rape-simulation games, Custer’s Revenge, was released in 1982 by the game maker Mystique. The goal was to rape a Native American woman tied to a cactus, with points awarded for every thrust. More than three decades later, our most popular games feature similar scenes. In Take-Two Interactive’s monster hit Grand Theft Auto (whose fifth iteration is one of the bestselling video games of all time), players can sleep with a prostitute, then murder her. Take-Two’s CEO, Strauss Zelnick, has defended the game, saying, “It is art. And I embrace that art, and it’s beautiful art, but it is gritty.” Like the broader tech industry, gaming has systematically excluded women for decades. In 2016, the International Game Developers Association (IGDA) reported that women make up just 22 percent of game developers, with men vastly outnumbering them in management and in powerful technical roles such as programming, software engineering, and technical design. Interestingly, the IGDA also found that men were much less likely than women to believe that diversity in the industry, and in the games it produces, was important. Indeed, women have also been poorly represented in the games themselves. As the report drily puts it, “Women have long experienced derogatory representations of their gender in videogame content as well as a general invisibility within the wider videogame culture.” It’s not surprising, then, that the most notorious case of online trolling sprang out of the gaming industry and that women were the targets. Gamergate was sparked in 2014 by the peevish post of an unhappy former boyfriend of one of the gaming industry’s few female developers. “This is written almost entirely in shitty metaphors and bitter snark,” wrote Eron Gjoni, an industry coder. “It’s a post about an ex.” Gjoni alleged that his former girlfriend, the game developer Zoe Quinn, had slept with other people in the gaming industry while she and Gjoni were dating. For reasons that are still somewhat inexplicable, the missive unleashed a volcanic explosion of hate, all of it directed at Quinn, who was a feminist critic of mainstream video games. Though Gjoni never called for any kind of campaign against Quinn, a certain subset of gamers took his nine-thousand-word, she-done-me-wrong post and turned it into a rallying point from which to defend their sacred, mostly male gaming territory. They derided Quinn’s game development as basic, simplistic girl work and claimed she used sexual favors to get good reviews. Gjoni’s post was put up on 4chan (not by him, he would later attest), an online community founded in 2003 by a then-teenager named Christopher Poole. Today 4chan claims some twenty million monthly visitors, including a large population that seems to delight in wreaking havoc online. They were particularly vicious when attacking Quinn and other women in the gaming industry. With 4chan members engaged in the fight, accounts sprang up across Twitter and Reddit to attack Quinn and spread the #Gamergate hashtag. The trolling expanded to target other female game developers on the premise that there was a conspiracy among women trying to ruin the industry by promoting more gender equality in the games themselves and in the studios where the products are produced. The Gamergaters created and shared lists of industry women to target and torment, including Anita Sarkeesian, a media critic who had risen to prominence by calling out sexism in the video game industry. The trolls even created a game called Beat Up Anita Sarkeesian, which enabled users to punch her virtual face. The game’s creators wrote, “There’s been a disgusting large imbalance of women who get beaten up in games. Let’s add a lady . . . She claims to want equality: Well, here it is.” Once riled, many internet trolls have no shame. They often compete with each other to see who can be the most cruel. And as Quinn and Sarkeesian found out, they don’t limit their attacks and threats to a single individual. They will threaten family members, including children. They will also instantly direct their bile toward anyone who comes to the target’s defense. That is where Brianna Wu enters the story. About two months after Gjoni’s post, Wu, an established game designer, spoke out against the #Gamergate campaign, sarcastically tweeting a meme suggesting that the trolls were saving everyone from an “apocalyptic future” where women might have slightly more influence in the industry. That’s when all hell broke loose. Shortly after responding to the trolls on Twitter, Wu was inundated with violent, disturbing threats on her life. One series of tweets in particular stands out. “Guess what bitch, I now know where you live;” “Your mutilated corpse will be on the front page of Jezebel tomorrow;” and “If you have any kids, they’re going to die too.” As the threats piled up, Wu and her husband fled their home, crashing on friends’ couches and hiding out in extended- stay hotels. They didn’t have children to worry about, but they did spend an inordinate amount of money boarding their dog while they were on the run. Wu had a choice to make: speak up for what was right or be silenced. She chose to talk back. “I was angry. I was scared. I was terrified. But within all of that I was trying to reach inside myself and find that bravery to really change the industry for women,” Wu told me. She spent days documenting the dozens of death threats against her so she could provide them to law enforcement officials. At the height of the online vitriol, she hired a full-time staff member to help collect information on her harassers to share with police, but none of that was enough to bring the perpetrators to justice. Wu wasn’t alone. Others who spoke out in support of Quinn or even mildly criticized the trolls or the gaming industry were similarly attacked. Kellee Santiago, a female game developer who went on to work at Google, likened Gamergate to a witch hunt or public stoning, telling me, “It was really shocking to discover that I live in a time and place in which such animosity toward women existed.” Troll army on the march Wu would later understand that she had been the victim of the trolling playbook, an extremely effective technique used to silence women that anonymous social-media denizens disagree with. "Find the woman and identify something in her past to distort her with," Wu explains. "If she's gay, attack her on that. Larger than size 12? Attack her on that. Transgender? Attack her on that. Find the spot where the woman feels most vulnerable and make her feel unsafe until the cost of speaking out is too great." Use of the troll playbook is not limited to the fans or members of the gaming industry. Online harassment is not one of the most disturbing problems plaguing the internet at large. ______________ Excerpted from “Brotopia: Breaking Up the Boys’ Club of Silicon Valley” by Emily Chang, with permission of Portfolio, an imprint of Penguin Publishing Group, a division of Penguin Random House LLC. Copyright © Emily Chang, 2018. *       *      * The Economist: Is sexism in tech better or worse than in other industries, and does it take on a different form? Emily Chang: “Brotopia” is everywhere, but what makes Silicon Valley’s sexism problem especially troubling is the fact that the tech industry is changing our lives faster than any other industry in the world. Women hold 25% of jobs across the industry, account for 9% of venture capital investors and women-led companies get just 2% of venture capital funding. And yet, Silicon Valley is deciding what we read, how we communicate, what we buy.  It is rapidly reshaping our culture, and yet the vast majority of the decisions made in tech are made by men. The lack of women in Silicon Valley is having an outsized impact on our lives and our children’s lives. Amazon’s facial recognition technology gets white men right almost 100% of the time and darker-skinned women wrong 31% of the time. Imagine being accused of a crime because the tech got it wrong? That kind of bias will enshrine and exacerbate the inequalities that already exist in our society. For another example, Twitter cofounder Evan Williams told me he thinks if more women had been on the team from the very beginning, perhaps online harassment and trolling wouldn’t be such a problem on the platform. The men who were building the product didn’t think about how it could be weaponised. Imagine if the internet were a friendlier, healthier place, how different might the world be? Something else that sets Silicon Valley apart is the entrenched belief among the powerbrokers that they are not only changing the world but changing the world “for the better.” That confidence creates a sense of moral exceptionalism and arrogance that distances Silicon Valley from real-world people and problems. In fact, the tech industry faces many of the same issues that other industries face with sexism, racism and ageism, but is blind to it, which means there is even less of an urgency to change Silicon Valley itself for the better. The Economist: What changes are needed for tech to become a more hospitable environment for women? Ms Chang: If the tech industry can connect the world and build self-driving cars and rockets to Mars, surely industry leaders can hire and promote and fund more women. We are seeing progress at companies where leadership has made this a top priority. The workplace collaboration startup Slack is a good case study. Rather than focusing on unconscious bias training alone, Slack has focused on giving their employees tools to combat their biases—standardising their recruiting, interview and review processes. Rather than complaining about the “pipeline problem,” the real-estate tech company Redfin hired women with non-traditional backgrounds, and recruited women from their marketing team and taught them how to code. It worked! Those women are getting promoted at the same rates as everybody else. Building a diverse team doesn’t have to take forever and inclusion can start today. All companies need to think harder about how to create cultures where everyone who is at the table also has a voice at the table, and can be the best versions of themselves. We’ve seen a lot of agitation among employees at companies like Google and Amazon for more inclusive workplaces that has made a difference. Employees themselves have a more powerful voice than ever before and should use their voices to make change. The Economist: According to a Pew survey in 2018, around half of Americans thought that #MeToo has made it harder for men to know how to interact with women in the workplace. Do you think there is any validity to such concerns? Ms Chang: It’s a good thing that the #MeToo movement has made some people question their behavior. Hopefully this leads to better behavior and better workplace practices. I do believe the folks who think that #MeToo will backfire on women are mistaken. The conversations and policy changes that are happening right now are essential to move workplace culture forward. There might be some additional nerves and uncertainty in the meantime, but it is an important part of a broader shift to ensure that women can reach their full potential in the workforce, which will benefit us all. The Economist: The number of women of colour in tech is incredibly disappointing, just 3-4% of Google employees are black. Are a different set of policies necessary to address the plight of “double minorities”? Ms Chang: Companies need to make sure that they are focused on improving all kinds of diversity and improving their cultures to support employees of all different backgrounds. Diversity isn’t just about gender. It’s about race, sexuality, age, socioeconomic background and more. If you are a “double minority” or a “triple minority,” you can double or triple how hard it might be to navigate your own workplace. I do think tech companies should set specific goals around race, in the rank and file, leadership and on the board, given how dismal the numbers are. The Economist: Should venture capitalists try to play a role in addressing tech’s gender imbalance, such as signaling to entrepreneurs that they look favourably on startups that have diverse workforces? Or is that idea madness because it interferes with what perhaps should be their sole goal: investing in companies with the best shot at success? Ms Chang: Absolutely! Venture capitalists have a huge role to play in making sure they are surfacing and investing in the entrepreneurs and ideas with the most potential. Investors are the “kingmakers” of Silicon Valley but they can and should be “queenmakers” as well. Given that women-led companies only received 2% of venture funding, it is painfully obvious that investors are not surfacing the best ideas. Unfortunately, funding is often doled out based on networks and “warm” introductions and these networks are dominated by men. Many venture firms have zero female partners and some are just hiring their first female partner in decades. In 2018, a group of women investors in Silicon Valley joined together to form a nonprofit called All Raise to increase the number of women investors and the number of women getting funded. They have already raised an incredible amount of awareness around these issues and I’m very hopeful their activism will play an important part of balancing the scale.