SUNDAY NIGHT is the time when the British population is most likely to gather round the TV and watch a programme simultaneously. The BBC has often devoted this slot to period dramas such as “Poldark” and “Howard’s End”, but the focus has shifted somewhat to thrillers. “The Night Manager”, a lavish adaptation of a novel by John Le Carré, was a huge hit in 2016; the latest ratings success has been “Line of Duty”, which ended its fifth season on May 5th. An estimated 9.6m people tuned in to watch the last episode. The series deals with the issue of police corruption, focusing on the AC-12 unit (AC stands for anti-corruption) in an unnamed British city. Police corruption is a TV staple, relying as it does on the dilemma described by the Roman poet Juvenal: Quis custodiet ipsos custodes—who guards the guards? The BBC produced “Between the Lines”, a similar series, in the 1990s, and probed the Met’s shady methods in “Undercover” in 2016.  Much of the credit for the success of “Line of Duty” must go to Jed Mercurio, the writer, who has mastered the knack of producing enough cliffhangers to keep viewers watching from week to week. He ruthlessly kills off key characters and prevents the narrative from becoming too predictable. Mr Mercurio had enormous success last year with “Bodyguard”, a flashy series based on a traumatised ex-soldier (played by Richard Madden), tasked with protecting the home secretary (Keeley Hawes). Lashings of sex, bomb blasts, shootings and betrayals duly followed. “Line of Duty” began in 2012 as a more low-key affair but the show has gradually increased the body count—and reduced the plausibility—over the years. The second series was the best, featuring a compelling performance from Ms Hawes as Lindsay Denton, the police officer under investigation. The best elements of the show were all in place here: the audience was kept guessing about Denton’s motives; there were interrogation scenes in which she turned the table on her questioners; and the AC-12 team was hampered by corrupt officers within its own ranks. Each series has revolved around a guest star, playing the officer under investigation—Lennie James and Thandie Newton were particular standouts. By centering the show’s focus on the “villains”, who were often covering up a catastrophic mistake, Mr Mercurio divided the audience’s loyalty. There was a temptation to hope that the rogue officers got away with it. Alas, the latest series has been the weakest of the five. The lead suspect, played by Stephen Graham, was killed off too early for his story to be satisfying. Instead, the main drama revolved around the hunt for “H”, the senior policeman apparently behind a gang of criminals which has dogged the AC-12 unit throughout the show’s history. All the evidence apparently pointed to the head of the unit, Ted Hastings (Adrian Dunbar), who had previously been portrayed as an old-fashioned, straight-arrow  type. This twist stretched credibility for all the wrong reasons. Whether Hastings was a criminal mastermind, smart enough to deceive his colleagues for years, or just a honest police officer being framed, he would never have been stupid enough to leave £50,000 in an envelope in plain sight in his hotel room. (The hotel, too, must have the most honest cleaning staff in the world.) The focus on Hastings also gave his sidekicks, Kate Fleming and Steve Arnott (Vicky McClure and Martin Compston) too little to do, bar deliver some clunky expositional dialogue. And without giving too much away, the final twist involved a dying detective who gave a crucial clue by using his fingers to transmit Morse code. Really? This was pure hokum. Several seemingly vital clues as to the identity of H, left scattered through the series, were explained away in a dissatisfying fashion. Instead of being served lemon sole, the audience had a plate of red herrings. The good news for fans is that there will be a sixth series, in which Mr Mercurio has the chance to return to form. Anna Maxwell Martin, as an icily ruthless chief superintendent, is also a welcome addition to the cast. In their line of duty, viewers will hope that the next series gives AC-12 some lines of plausibility as well.