FIVE-TO-FOUR decisions usually indicate that the Supreme Court is divided along ideological lines. In the term that ended last June, 14 of the 19 cases resolved by a 5-4 vote pitted the five Republican-appointed justices against the four Democratic picks. Occasionally there are unexpected lineups. Last year, Justice Neil Gorsuch joined the liberal justices against his fellow conservatives in an immigrant-rights case. He did the same two months ago in a ruling favourable to the Yakama Nation in Washington state. On May 20th, Justice Gorsuch again swerved left to stand up for the rights of Native Americans. The ruling, Herrera v Wyoming, honours an 1868 treaty between the Crow Tribe (the Apsáalooke in their language) and the federal government. The story behind the case began in the winter of 2013, when Clayvin Herrera and a group of Crow hunters tracked a small herd of elk from Montana across the Wyoming state line into the Bighorn National Forest. After killing three animals, Mr Herrera and his fellow hunters carried the meat back to their reservation in Montana to feed their families and other members of the tribe. Wyoming soon charged and convicted Mr Herrera of illegal hunting, but the Crow member believed he was well within his rights under the Reconstruction-era Treaty of Fort Laramie. In exchange for ceding 30m acres of land to the United States, the Crow would enjoy “the right to hunt on the unoccupied lands of the United States so long as game may be found thereon, and as long as peace subsists among the whites and Indians on the borders of the hunting districts”.  The lower courts balked at this argument, telling Mr Herrera that the treaty was invalid under Ward v Race Horse, a Supreme Court ruling from 1896. Race Horse held that Idaho’s Bannock tribe had lost its hunting rights on federal lands when Wyoming gained statehood. Part of being a sovereign state, the Supreme Court reasoned, is having dominion over the wildlife and game within the state’s borders. But a century later, the Supreme Court walked away from Race Horse. In Minnesota v Mille Lacs Band of Chippewa Indians (1999), a 5-4 liberal majority decided that Native treaty rights “are not impliedly terminated upon statehood” after all. In a majority opinion by Justice Sonia Sotomayor, the Supreme Court relied on Mille Lacs to vindicate the Crow right to pursue game on federal lands. Herrera began with some history. “The Crow Tribe first inhabited modern-day Montana more than three centuries ago”, Justice Sotomayor wrote. “The Tribe was nomadic, and its members hunted game for subsistence”. After the 1868 treaty, when the Wyoming Territory was established, Congress promised the new designation would not “impair the rights of person or property now pertaining to the Indians in said Territory, so long as such rights shall remain unextinguished by treaty”. The Herrera majority also had to contend with Crow Tribe of Indians v Repsis, a 1996 ruling at the Tenth Circuit Court of Appeals holding that because Bighorn National Park was not “unoccupied” within the meaning of the 1868 treaty, the Crow had no right to bring their hunting rifles there. Justice Sotomayor dispatched Repsis by clarifying that Race Horse had been superseded by Mille Lacs. The 1999 ruling had “upended both lines of reasoning in Race Horse”, the court held, and “the crucial inquiry for treaty termination analysis is whether Congress has expressly abrogated an Indian treaty right or whether a termination point identified in the treaty itself has been satisfied”. The court’s conclusion in Herrera is this, then: absent both explicit word from Congress and a clause in the treaty laying out terms of its own dissolution, the 1868 promise to the Crow tribe must be kept. Lest there be any confusion in the future, Race Horse’s view that statehood implies the forfeiture of Indian rights is “repudiated”, Justice Sotomayor wrote. As for the claim that Bighorn is not “unoccupied” and therefore closed to Native American hunting, Justice Sotomayor summoned more common sense. “Treaty analysis begins with the text”, she wrote, “and treaty terms are construed as ‘they would naturally be understood by the Indians’. There is no doubt that the Crow “would have understood the word ‘unoccupied’ to denote an area free of residence or settlement by non-Indians”. As there were (and are) no white men moving into homes in the park, the Crow would have no reason to construe it as occupied land. A petulant dissent from Justice Samuel Alito called the majority’s view “puzzling”. How, he asked, could the court “plow ahead” with its interpretation of the 1868 treaty without adequately addressing the grounds of the decision in Repsis? In any event, the park is not “unoccupied”, Justice Alito wrote, so Mr Herrera and his fellow tribe members must keep out. The dissent's tone sounds a discordant note alongside the majority’s plain reading of the treaty. Justice Gorsuch’s endorsement of the liberal interpretation gives Herrera added weight and is no surprise: a Coloradan, he came to the Supreme Court from the Tenth Circuit, where he was vigilant on questions of tribal sovereignty.