“I AM WHAT I am today because of the ANC,” says Princess Kgosimang, as she walks the short distance from her house in Soweto to the polling station. The 71-year-old lists the ways her life has improved since the end of apartheid. She has a home of her own, a state pension of 1,700 rand ($118) per month and her grandchildren go to multiracial schools. While she dislikes how corrupt the African National Congress (ANC) became under Jacob Zuma, president from 2009 to 2018, she believes that his successor, Cyril Ramaphosa, can clean house. “I want to give him a chance to make amends,” she says. On May 8th enough voters like Ms Kgosimang turned out to re-elect the party that has governed South Africa since 1994, when Nelson Mandela was elected as the country’s first black president. At the time of writing the ANC is projected to win 57% of the national vote, according to analysis by Dawie Scholtz, a psephologist. Yet this is not an enthusiastic endorsement. The ANC’s success probably relied on older black voters with memories of the struggle, rather than on younger South Africans who are fed up with corruption, inequality and a lack of jobs.  In each of the five previous general elections since the advent of democracy the ANC won more than 60% of the vote. This will be the first time the party’s result fell below that line in a national ballot. Turnout is also down; projections suggest just 65% of the registered electorate voted, compared with 73% in 2014. It is a long way from 1994, when turnout was near universal, with millions of non-white South Africans waking up before dawn to line up for their first opportunity to vote. Mr Ramaphosa’s supporters will argue that 57% is a decent result. They will point to the 54% of the vote the ANC got in local elections in 2016, arguing that the party’s performance would have been much worse under a different leader. That is most likely true —and their case will be stronger if the ANC can hold on to its majority in Gauteng, the country’s most populous province. (That result was too close to call at the time of writing.) But it is also apparent that the president has not been able to reverse the downward trend in the ANC’s performance at national elections. Not that the results were especially encouraging for the two main opposition parties: the Democratic Alliance (DA) and the Economic Freedom Fighters (EFF). Though it will retain majority control of the Western Cape province, which it has governed since 2009, the DA seems to have made little progress nationally since 2014, when it won 22% of the vote. It is projected to win a marginally lower share this time around, according to Mr Scholtz. Another model devised by the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research predicts it will get 24%. Early indications suggest that although the DA increased its share of the black electorate, it lost votes among white Afrikaans-speaking South Africans. These probably went to the Freedom Front Plus party, which may win about 500,000 votes or around 3% of the total. That would represent its best ever showing and a tripling of support since 2014, a reflection of its voters’ concern about policies such as the expropriation of land without compensation. That policy has been championed by the EFF. The populist black-nationalist party is projected to win about 10% of the vote, up from 6% in 2014, and may yet hold the balance of power in Gauteng. Nevertheless its projected tally is a few percentage points below what some polls had suggested—a reflection perhaps of low turnout among young black South Africans, a group that has gravitated towards the EFF. Though the official final tallies will not be declared until the weekend, attention is already turning to what the results mean for reform under Mr Ramaphosa, whose inauguration is scheduled for May 25th. South Africa is in a perilous state. The official unemployment rate is 27%, debt to GDP has more than doubled over the past decade to 56%, and Eskom, the state-owned utility, struggles to keep the lights on. South Africans are increasingly frustrated that no one has yet been prosecuted for corruption during the era of “state capture” under Mr Zuma, when a corrupt family dictated government policies and the appointment of cabinet ministers. Mr Ramaphosa has slowly begun to repair the country’s institutions. He has said some sensible things about the economy. But he has been constrained by his own party, many of whose members have been “deployed” into state-owned companies or the civil service and fear for their jobs, should the president prove serious about sacking the inept and prosecuting the corrupt. There will be a lot of commentary about whether the ANC’s share of the national vote gives Mr Ramaphosa a mandate for reform. More important, though, is whether he is willing to use fully the considerable powers of the South African presidency. There will be two early clues. The first is the size of his new cabinet. South Africa has more than 30 cabinet ministers, a high number in global terms. A slim-downed executive would be a symbol that the president is less inclined to hand out plum jobs to buy the loyalty of incompetent comrades. The second clue will be who he appoints as ministers. If the last of Mr Zuma’s loyalists, such as Nomvula Mokonyane and Bathabile Dlamini, are removed, while wise hands such as Tito Mboweni and Pravin Gordhan, are retained, then this will be a promising sign. Twenty-five years after the end of apartheid, the political centre in South Africa has just about held. But the initial results suggest that it is fragile. Parties on the far left and right have picked up voters, while millions more disillusioned South Africans stayed at home. It is Mr Ramaphosa’s task to restore their faith in democracy.