DESPITE ITS repeated refusals to curb haywire electoral maps, the Supreme Court has no great love of partisan gerrymandering. When, 33 years ago, the justices unanimously let a Republican gerrymander in Indiana slide, they said the impact on Democrats was discriminatory but not egregiously so. When in 2004 the court decided not to strike down maps favouring Republicans in Pennsylvania, four justices determined that gerrymandering, while nothing to celebrate, was not a matter the judiciary could police. And in 2018, challenges to devastating gerrymanders in Wisconsin and Maryland (one for each party) came up short on procedural grounds. Despite their demurrals, the justices seem to agree that it is poor form for politicians of one party to methodically preserve their seats with precision-engineered maps. In 2017, Samuel Alito, a conservative justice unwilling to crack down on partisan draughtsmen, nevertheless called gerrymandering “distasteful”. So when the justices took up the matter yet again in March, several pursued a new tack. Maybe the judiciary does not need to meddle with politically tainted line-drawing, Donald Trump’s two appointees suggested in the oral arguments, because a new political awakening is fixing the problem all by itself. Justice Neil Gorsuch launched this line of questioning in Rucho v Common Cause, a challenge to an extreme Republican gerrymander of congressional districts in North Carolina. “We’ve heard that the court must act because nobody else can as a practical matter”, Justice Gorsuch told Paul Clement, the lawyer representing the North Carolina General Assembly. But “what’s the scope of the problem here?” Seven sparsely populated states with only one congressional district have no gerrymandering (or district lines) at all, and a handful of other states have taken redistricting out of politicians’ hands. These changes, in Justice Gorsuch’s home state of Colorado as well as in California, Arizona, Michigan, New York, Missouri, Ohio and Utah, mean that nonpartisan or bipartisan commissions, not the legislatures themselves, draw the lines. And some state Supreme Courts, notably Pennsylvania's, are finding electoral maps invalid under state constitutions. “My sense”, Justice Gorsuch said, “is there’s a lot of movement in this area”.  Justice Brett Kavanaugh, the court’s newest member, voiced frustration with Democratic gerrymandering in his home state of Maryland. But he, too, explored the idea that the democratic process may spare the Supreme Court from stepping in. There is “a fair amount of activity going on in the states”, Justice Kavanaugh observed to Emmet Bondurant, the lawyer for the North Carolina plaintiffs. Voters are “recognising the same problem that you’re recognising” and taking action to hand map-drawing to independent commissions. Mr Bondurant’s reply, supported later in the hearing by Allison Riggs, another lawyer arguing against the skewed North Carolina maps, was a reality check. Most states that have moved to redistricting commissions in hopes of dampening the political gamesmanship in electoral map-making have got there via ballot initiatives: amendments to their state constitutions approved by voters at the polls. But many states, including most east of the Mississippi River, do not provide for such a process, and it is distinctly unlikely that state legislatures would vote to strip themselves of the power to redistrict. Neither Republicans nor Democrats have an incentive to pass off the pen to a committee that will draw maps less favourable to them in the next decade’s elections. And moves are afoot in the Pennsylvania legislature to gerrymander judicial elections in response to the state Supreme Court's crackdown on a Republican-favouring congressional map. In the face of evidence that states are not fully equipped to handle gerrymandering on their own, Justices Gorsuch and Kavanaugh waxed poetic about the wonders of the political process. Mr Clement did nothing to discourage them, mentioning that the House of Representatives recently voted for HR-1, a bill which would, among other things, force all states to transfer electoral cartography from legislatures to independent commissions. Mr Clement said this was evidence that Congress, in addition to the states, “is able to take action”. He even had a response, disingenuous though it was, to Chief Justice John Roberts’s riposte that members of Congress must be “pretty happy with the way the districting has been done”. Actually, Mr Clement replied, it is remarkable that “a majority of Congress thinks that they should pass HR-1”. He did not mention that Mitch McConnell, Republican majority leader of the Senate, has declared HR-1 dead on arrival in his chamber. Nor did he clarify that it is only Democrats in the House, not “a majority of Congress”, that wants to see HR-1 become law. (Mr Clement did mention, however, that forcing legislatures to outsource their maps might be unconstitutional.) Despite its limits, enthusiasm for democratic change is not entirely misplaced. “Slay the Dragon”, a new documentary film by Barak Goodman and Chris Durrance, detailing the increasingly sophisticated scourge of partisan gerrymandering in America, shows the power of grassroots organising. After conveying the frightful implications of computer-aided map-drawing, “Slay the Dragon” tells the story of Katie Fahy, a political neophyte who gets so fed up with election doping in her state of Michigan that she decides to do something about it. Ms Fahy builds Voters Not Politicians, an all-volunteer organisation to get a redistricting-reform amendment on the 2018 ballot. She gathers the required hundreds of thousands of signatures; fights a well-financed legal assault on the measure; wins victories in both federal and state court to keep the proposal on the ballot; and persuades 61% of Michigan voters to adopt the plan. The story is a remarkable example of how civic passion and pluck can make a difference. Yet the difficulty of replicating Michigan’s transition in most other states is a hard reality. And the Wolverine state’s success is allowing some justices to believe that the courts can sit back and let democracy take its course. Ms Fahy bristles when she hears this. But she and activists in other states with independent commissions may have more disappointments ahead. In 2015, a redistricting commission in Arizona barely survived a constitutional challenge at the Supreme Court. The decision was written by Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg and clinched by Justice Anthony Kennedy, who left the bench last summer. Chief Justice John Roberts's dissent accused the majority of "deliberate constitutional evasion": Article I empowers only state legislatures to draw electoral lines, he wrote. With a more conservative Justice Kavanaugh now in Justice Kennedy's seat, and the pointed dissenter in the Arizona case now the swing justice, independent commissions—and America’s electoral democracy—remain vulnerable.