WHICH COMPETITION has produced the most dominant champion during the past month? Manchester City’s likely run to an English Premier League football title ranks high on the list, as does Tiger Woods’s unflappable final round of golf at the Masters. But no one has left the opposition in the dust like James Holzhauer—the current supremo on “Jeopardy!”, a long-running American-based quiz show. Mr Holzhauer has finished first among the three contestants in 22 consecutive appearances, winning (and enriching himself) by unprecedented margins. A typical “Jeopardy!” victor takes home around $20,000 for a night’s work, and before Mr Holzhauer’s debut, the single-game earnings record was $77,000. That figure, achieved by Roger Craig in 2010, barely exceeds Mr Holzhauer’s average result during his run, a mere $76,864 per evening. He now owns the top 12 single-game results in history, and has won just under $1.7m in the space of a month. Mr Holzhauer remains a long way off from the game’s records for consecutive wins (74) and total regular-play winnings ($2.52m), both set by Ken Jennings in 2004. However, he is the first entrant with a realistic shot at chasing down Mr Jennings’s marks. And even if he falls short, his successful strategy is sure to spawn hordes of imitators—which, depending on your perspective, will either invigorate or ruin the game.  ”Jeopardy!”—the programme’s title comes complete with enthusiastic punctuation—is fundamentally a trivia game. Each evening, three contestants face down two rounds of 30 clues, arranged in themed categories. The show’s signature gimmick is that Alex Trebek, the host, presents the clues as answers (e.g., “It’s how you say ‘tomorrow’ in Madrid”) and requires competitors to respond in the form of a question (e.g., “What is ‘mañana’”). In the first round, correct answers are worth between $200 and $1,000, and in the second round, Double Jeopardy, the values are twice as large. The concluding round, dubbed Final Jeopardy, consists of a single question, on which all three players get to wager any portion of their winnings, based on their knowledge of the announced category. (Rather than racing to answer the question first using the buzzer, as in the previous rounds, in Final Jeopardy all contestants write down their responses.) Whichever of the three competitors winds up with the most cash after the final round not only keeps his or her winnings, but also gets to return the next evening. Mr Holzhauer has proven himself a master at the quiz-show aspect of the game, correctly answering 60% of total clues and 95% (21 of 22) of the more difficult Final Jeopardy prompts. Mr Jennings managed 60% and 68%, respectively, and the average competitor passes the Final Jeopardy test only half of the time. A head full of facts, however, is merely the price of entry. On-air contestants pass through both online and in-person vetting to ensure formidable competition for every episode. The difference between a garden-variety trivia buff and a “Jeopardy!” champion, then, lies in mastery of the format’s quirks, such as the buzzer. The best players are able to evaluate the clue and buzz in at exactly the right moment. Too early, and the system locks you out for a crucial fraction of a second; too late, and the brainiac at the next podium gets there first. In an unusual 2011 tournament, IBM’s Watson supercomputer was able to vanquish Mr Jennings and Brad Rutter, a fellow champion, largely because the machine didn’t struggle with the vagaries of human buzzer-mashing. The best-prepared challengers spend as much time with makeshift signaling devices as they do with the encyclopedia. When Mr Holzhauer first arrived on set, he peppered production staff with detailed questions about the buzzer. A contestant with well-honed reflexes and an exhaustive bank of general knowledge is set up for a financially rewarding, multi-episode run. But Mr Holzhauer, a 34-year-old professional sports bettor who is used to exploiting inefficiently priced opportunities, has redefined just how lucrative the nightly crown can be. Although the 60 clues have a nominal total value of $54,000, three of them are “Daily Doubles”. These coveted treasures, hidden in different spots every night on the board of subject categories and question dollar values, allow the contestant who selected them to wager anywhere from $1,000 up to their entire cash haul up to that point. Once discovered, they are gone. That makes finding them essential: it not only provides the chance to double one’s winnings, but also prevents opponents from doing the same. The traditional pattern of “Jeopardy!” play is to progress through a category from the easiest, least lucrative clue at the top of a column on the board to the hardest one with the biggest reward at the bottom. This approach has its merits. Contestants are wise to select questions on the subjects about which they are most knowledgeable, and to lock up the modest profits from easy questions rather than risking a wrong answer and handing over the choice of the next clue to an opponent. Moreover, Daily Doubles are most often found in the bottom two rows. The more cash you amass before landing on a Daily Double, the more you have to wager and win once you do find one. However, delaying the hunt for Daily Doubles also increases the risk of failing to find them at all before one’s opponents do. As a result, aggressive players tend to break with tradition and start near the bottom of the board, minimising the chances of a Daily Double falling into a rival’s hands. This strategy is now most associated with Arthur Chu, who won 11 times in 2014. However, its nickname—the “Forrest Bounce”—dates all the way back to Chuck Forrest, a five-time champion in 1985. (Before 2003, winners were sent home after a five-game streak of victories.) Watson, the IBM supercomputer, also prioritised hunting for Daily Doubles early on. Mr Holzhauer has taken this strategy to new heights. Although he is far from the first contestant to emphasise ferreting out Daily Doubles, few of his predecessors have been willing to bet the maximum—and risk losing it all—consistently. Such bold wagers are Mr Holzhauer’s signature. For example, in his fourth outing, on April 9th, he uncovered a Daily Double with only the third Double Jeopardy play. He ventured his entire kitty of $14,600, so when he correctly answered that Jesse James was the outlaw killed by Robert Ford, his earnings doubled. That propelled him towards a record $110,914 tally, a mark that would last eight days before Mr Holzhauer bettered it himself. Mr Holzhauer’s appetite for such large bets makes him an extreme outlier. In the 230 games of Season 34 in 2017-18, the average Daily Double wager was $2,289, with only four bets topping $10,000. In his 22 games, Mr Holzhauer has uncovered 53 Daily Doubles and staked an average of nearly $10,000 on them. Mr Jennings made only three five-figure bets in his entire 75-episode run. The flurry of big-dollar bets gives the impression that Mr Holzhauer is playing a particularly volatile brand of “Jeopardy!”. But as one would expect from a professional bettor, he carefully calibrates his risks based on his position relative to his rivals. Among his 17 biggest Daily Double wagers, 15—including two for $25,000 apiece—were for less than his advantage over the second-place player, ensuring that he would remain in the lead even if he answered incorrectly. And his exceedingly high accuracy shifts the maths in favour of betting the house. Typical contestants flub Daily Doubles about one-third of the time, but only four of Mr Holzhauer’s 53 bets have gone wrong. Mr Holzhauer’s gigantic Final Jeopardy wagers fit the same mold. In his landmark $131,127 game on April 17th, he entered the final round with more than $71,000, compared to a mere $5,400 for the second-place competitor. He ventured just over $60,000—the largest final-round gamble ever—on his knowledge of 20th century literary characters, knowing he would come back the next day regardless of the outcome. It’s a risk that few could stomach. But given his demonstrated success rate on even the toughest “Jeopardy!” clues, it was the smart bet. This record-setting success has led commentators to suggest that Mr Holzhauer has “hacked” or “broken” “Jeopardy!” But it is a mistake to attribute his success to mere tactical savvy. He is in a different class from Mr Chu, who inspired many of the same claims, as well as comparisons to the “Moneyball” Oakland Athletics, the baseball franchise that overcame the limitations of a small budget by defying many of the sport’s traditions. If Mr Chu paralleled the Athletics, using unconventional tactics to make the most of pedestrian skills, Mr Holzhauer is more like a big-budget club with the good sense to take advantage of low-budget strategies. Mr Chu, a champion in 2014, parlayed run-of-the-mill success rates of 67% on Daily Doubles and 50% on Final Jeopardy into a 12-night run worth over $270,000. For Mr Holzhauer, Daily Double-hunting and aggressive wagering are not substitutes for skill, but tools to reap even bigger paydays from world-class trivia prowess. In theory, Mr Holzhauer’s unprecedented rate of winnings per game could pose a threat to the show’s bottom line. Its bean-counters surely did not budget for a string of six-figure payouts. But as good as Mr Holzhauer’s performance has been for his own finances, it is likely to wind up benefiting those of “Jeopardy!” as well. When Mr Jennings went on his epic run, the show’s ratings increased by 22% year over year. Mr Holzhauer is already having a similar effect: viewership during his streak has risen from 9.6m to 12m, making it America’s top-rated syndicated show. Mr Trebek, its mild-mannered host, was recently diagnosed with stage IV pancreatic cancer and is likely to hand over the reins soon. The flurry of media attention Mr Holzhauer has garnered, and the looming suspense over whether future contestants will be able to replicate his success, should help maintain the public’s interest during this transition. The longer Mr Holzhauer’s run goes on, the more he will be transformed from a flash-in-the-pan curiosity to a potential household name. A series of “Jeopardy!” records will serve as milestones along the way. The first will be Mr Jennings’s spot on top of the total regular-play winnings leaderboard, as Mr Holzhauer is already two-thirds of the way there in one-third of the time it took his predecessor. Even more mouthwatering is the potential for the newcomer to win 75 consecutive games. One  analysis conducted in 2015 looked at Mr Jennings’s 75 regular-play games and deduced that he went into each encounter with a 97.9% chance of victory. That implies he might have gotten lucky to last as long as he did: in theory, the median win streak for such a player would be a more modest 47 games. A similar model considers Mr Holzhauer to be a 97.9% favourite in each game, the exact same mark as Mr Jennings’s. (Although Mr Holzhauer’s average performance so far dwarfs that of Mr Jennings, he may have benefited from good fortune as well as his own ability. Mr Jennings appeared in more than three times as many games as Mr Holzhauer has so far, providing greater certainty about his skill advantage.) At a 97.9% probability of victory in each game, Mr Holzhauer would have just a 32.1% chance of winning the additional 53 consecutive contests he needs to break the record. Even the risk-loving Mr Holzhauer might not want to bet on his own hopes of equalling the all-time champion’s streak.