THE flyblown plaza in front of Sarajevo’s railway station is called “Srebrenica Genocide Victims Square”. The echoey, empty station is like a cathedral. When Sarajevo, Bosnia’s capital, was at the heart of the former Yugoslavia it bustled. Now only 11 trains a day depart, and 11 arrive. To understand quite how sad a state of affairs this is, compare it to the central station in Zagreb, the capital of neighbouring Croatia. Its population is, admittedly, 40% larger than Bosnia’s. Yet Zagreb’s station has more than 16 times as much rail traffic, not counting trains serving the city’s suburban stations.  There was a time when you could get from Sarajevo by train to most of Europe. But in the last few years financial disputes have cut Bosnian railways off from the rest of the world. Now you can’t even take a train from here to Croatia, let alone farther away. I have come to Sarajevo station to catch the train to Banja Luka, now the capital of the Serb part of Bosnia-Hercegovina. Its government denies that a genocide took place in Srebrenica, where Bosnian Serb soldiers killed some 8,000 Bosniak (Bosnian Muslim) men and boys in 1995, towards the end of the Bosnian war. Most Bosnians have lost the habit of train travel. “You are mad” said friends when I said I was taking the train: it will be disgusting and the toilets will be clogged. They don’t know that it is as modern a train as you will find anywhere in Europe. The rolling stock was delivered from Spain in 2010 and then parked in a siding until 2016, when tracks and infrastructure was finally upgraded to take them. The first railway to Banja Luka, which connected it to Croatia, was laid by the Ottomans in 1872. Then came the Austro-Hungarians and finally the Yugoslavs. The link to Sarajevo—built by prisoners of war and communist youth brigades, including thousands of foreigners—was completed only in the early 1950s. During the Bosnian war the railways stopped running, except for small sections. When the train pulls in to Sarajevo, only one door is unlocked for passengers to get on. “That way” says the conductor pointing right. “What about that way?” I ask. “Migrants” he says brusquely, but if I really want to sit with them that would be my choice. The migrants take the train on to Bihac, from where they try to sneak past border guards get to Croatia and then deeper into the EU. I am not here to write about them, but I join them anyway. Opposite me is Morsal, 26 years old. She is travelling with her two-year-old daughter, who was born in a refugee camp in Serbia. Morsal explains that she used to be a policewoman in Afghanistan. She shows me a picture of a woman surrounded by white cloth and has something white on her mouth. It takes me a few seconds to realise that the subject is lying in a coffin. Morsal had received a call from a man who warned her to quit the police; a week later four men burst into her home and shot her 16-year-old sister dead, thinking it was Morsal. Within hours Morsal began her flight via Pakistan, Iran, Turkey, Bulgaria, Serbia and now Bosnia. Next to me is Asal, her parents and little brother. They are Iranian Kurds and for 15 years Asal’s father had been a member of an underground Kurdish political group. The Iranian security services discovered it, two members were executed and the family fled. Last October Serbia ended a brief period of no-visa requirements for Iranians, but not before there had been an influx of asylum-seekers. “Did you fly to Serbia?” I ask. “No, we came with the mafia,” says a deadpan Asal. She is only 11-years old and speaks fantastic English. I have little doubt that Asal and Morsal will flourish in, and contribute to, any country that takes them in. I cannot say the same about a group of Algerian men in our carriage. One, who sports a top-knot, says his father is in France but he cannot get a visa to go there because, he chortles, he has been in jail four times “for fighting and that sort of thing”. At Banja Luka only one door opens, again. For some reason three of the migrants try to get off here. They are greeted by Bosnian Serb policemen who bark the equivalent of “Oi! Where do you think you are going?” No Muslim refugees are allowed off here. I ask the train crew why they separated the migrants from the other passengers, who are a mix of Bosniaks, Serbs and Croats. Answer: “Because they complain that the migrants smell.” I immediately remembered the many refugees of the Yugoslav wars: Bosniaks who flopped exhausted into Croatia, one night in 1992, having been driven out by Bosnian Serbs; Serbs who had fled Croatia to Banja Luka on their tractors; and Croats going the other way on theirs to get away from Serbs. “Have all of you actually forgotten that this was you not so long ago?” I want to ask them. Bosnian activists have helped the refugees. But for many Bosnians, regardless of ethnicity, the bitterness that lingers, almost a quarter of a century after the end of the war, seems to have squeezed out any sense of sympathy.