NEATLY HANDWRITTEN, with a simple diagram below a numbered list, the sheet looks like any fussy hobbyist’s record of some cranky project in a garden shed. This, though, is a page taken from a hospital bacteriologist’s lab notebooks in December 1928. A few weeks previously, the researcher had found by chance that a common-as-muck fungus had contaminated his experiment but seemed to be purging bacteria. This sheet confirms that Penicillium, that nasty old mould that thrives in damp, has thoroughly zapped the streptococcus bacteria in a blood sample. Within 15 years, Alexander Fleming’s discovery at St Mary’s Hospital in London had—thanks to biochemists Ernst Chain and Howard Florey—led to effective penicillin treatment. It would inaugurate the antibiotic revolution, save tens of millions of lives and even (in some accounts) help win the second world war after its supply to Allied forces after D-Day. At the British Library (BL), Fleming’s modest but epoch-making notes sit alongside a selection of other illustrious scrawls as part of the exhibition “Writing: Making Your Mark”. Mozart punctiliously lists what he has just written and transcribes the first few bars of each newly hatched piece. James Joyce’s notes for “Ulysses” (pictured) swirl across the page. Florence Nightingale, by contrast, meticulously logs her appointments hour-by-hour, while the doomed Captain Scott signs off his Antarctic journals in 1912 with a shaky pencilled plea: “For God’s sake look after our people”.  “Writing: Making Your Mark” spans the history and technology of literacy, alphabets, scripts and printing in mind-stretching leaps over centuries and cultures. Yet it is these humble notes—all plucked from the BL’s own treasure-hoard of manuscripts—that show how the simplest act of written record-keeping can set in train ideas and observations that may eventually change the world. Across the arts and sciences, the notebooks of the great can transport the reader to the front-lines of innovation; they offer an intimacy not found in other versions of their work. From the flood of inspiration and speculation that flows over 13,000 pages of mirror-writing in Leonardo da Vinci’s notebooks to the weather-battered logs that accompanied Ernest Hemingway on the adventures that fuelled his fiction, the spontaneous note is the seed of genius. Even the stormiest of creative minds has relied on this handy accoutrement to capture each stray flash of thought. Wilhelm von Lenz, Beethoven’s early biographer, reported that when the composer, a serial sketchbook-scribbler, “was enjoying a beer he might suddenly pull out his notebook and write something in it. ‘Something just occurred to me,’ he would say, sticking it back in his pocket.” In some cases, the thrilling proximity to the moment of discovery you find in notebooks is no mere metaphor. If you wish to consult the lab books in Paris that document Marie Curie’s pioneering work on radiation, you’ll have to sign a waiver and wear a protective suit. Stored in a lead-lined chest, they will continue to be dangerously radioactive for the next 1,500 years. Notebooks have hosted the rough drafts of successive intellectual revolutions. No surprise, then, that wannabe innovators should seek to capture the magic of the breakthrough in a pocket companion. Any smart bookshop will sell you a Moleskine notebook, allegedly the trusty standby of giants such as Hemingway and Picasso. In fact, as the brand founded in Milan by Maria Sebregondi in 1997 has always acknowledged, the Moleskine aims merely to “bring back to life” the sort of item that Hemingway and his chums once bought from stationers in Paris. Sebregondi’s own inspiration came from Bruce Chatwin’s “The Songlines”: whereas to lose a passport was a mishap, Chatwin writes, “to lose a notebook was a catastrophe”. Authentic or not, the sturdy little Moleskine has legions of bookish devotees. Horatio Clare, another travel writer, even claims that it’s stab- and bullet-proof (but only up to 9mm ammunition). These days there are many other note-taking options. Smartphones and tablets, along with a digital stylus, allow the immediate record of events and ideas in script, audio and video. Yet, for many, the manual effort of pen against paper still incubates invention best of all. For “Underland”, his new book of subterranean journeys through “deep time”, Robert MacFarlane filled more than a score of miscellaneous notebooks, “from a tiny lilac-coloured Moleskine” to “robust hardback journals, tough enough to withstand being dragged through limestone tunnel systems and soaked in slate mines”. People asked him: why not just use a phone? “The answer is that phones smash, while notebooks bend,” he writes. Besides, there is mounting evidence that the act of writing may deepen understanding in itself. In a book accompanying the BL exhibition, Angela Webb, a psychologist, surveys recent research that compares students’ handwritten assignments with typed and oral reports on the same subject. Most of the data “found overwhelmingly in favour of handwriting as the mode most likely to support learning”. Whip out your favourite jottings book and make a note of that. “Writing: Making Your Mark” continues at the British Library until August 27th. The book of the same name, edited by Ewan Clayton, is published by the British Library; £40