IN RECENT years, the Supreme Court has made a habit of waving a gavel and turning blockbuster cases into duds. In the last year, two great reckonings—a pair of challenges to partisan gerrymandering and a tiff over a Colorado baker who refused to make a cake celebrating a gay wedding—were both defused with narrow rulings that steered around the heart of the disputes. The strategy of avoidance has its virtues: contentious questions continue to be asked, discussions advance. But as Brett Kavanaugh noted in another context during his Senate confirmation hearing last autumn, “what comes around goes around”. The questions often end up back in the justices’ laps. That seems to be the case with gay-wedding cakes. Last June, the Supreme Court flicked away Masterpiece Cakeshop v Colorado Civil Rights Commission with an artful dodge. Rather than address the fundamental conflict—anti-discrimination protections for gay people rubbing up against business owners’ First Amendment claims to run their shops in line with their conscience—seven justices found an escape route. The trouble with Colorado’s Civil Rights Commission wasn’t its decision to enforce the state’s public-accommodations law against the Christian baker who had turned away two men. The constitutional violation lay in hostility vocalised by two of the civil-rights commissioners against the baker during their deliberations. The Christian cake artist was deprived of a commission that was “neutral” and “tolerant” of his faith, Justice Anthony Kennedy wrote.  By pinning the First Amendment harm on a pair of purportedly anti-religious messages, Justice Kennedy made the decision about procedure, not substance. He avoided addressing the constitutionality of the decision to require the baker to make cakes for all comers. That question, he wrote, will have to be resolved “in the future” when similar cases arise. The future may be now. In 2013, Rachel Cryer and her mother walked into Sweetcakes By Melissa, a bakery in Gresham, Oregon. They wanted to order a custom wedding cake for Rachel and her fiancée, Laurel Bowman. But when Aaron Klein, the proprietor, heard the cake was for two women, according to the bakery’s petition, he “apologised and said that, because of their religious beliefs, he and his wife could not create a custom-designed cake for that purpose”. The Kleins serve gay customers but will not make them wedding cakes because they “do not believe that other types of interpersonal unions are marriages, and they believe it is sinful to celebrate them as such”. Mr Klein cited a line from Leviticus that gay relations are “an abomination”, a comment Ms Cryer’s mother reported to her daughter, who was already in the car. Ms Cryer and Ms Bowman both “experienced emotional distress”, their brief reports, and Rachel “no longer wanted to participate in the planning of her wedding because of the constant fear that she would again be refused service based on her sexual orientation”. The couple then complained to Oregon’s Bureau of Labour and Industries, which found that the Kleins had violated the state law requiring “full and equal accommodations, advantages, facilities and privileges of any place of public accommodation, without any distinction, discrimination or restriction on account of sexual orientation”. The fine was hefty—$135,000—and Sweetcakes soon went out of business. The complaints the petitioners raise in Klein v. Oregon Bureau of Labour and Industries are familiar. It is a violation of free speech and freedom of religion, they argue, to coerce a business owner to contravene his conscience. But the Kleins take their case one significant step further than Jack Phillips (the Colorado baker) did in Masterpiece Cakeshop: they are asking the Supreme Court to overrule Employment Division v Smith, a 5-4 ruling written by the late Justice Antonin Scalia in 1990. In Smith, Mr Scalia disappointed two members of the Native American Church who were fired from their jobs for taking peyote, a hallucinogen used in their religious rituals. The church members have no right to unemployment compensation, Mr Scalia concluded, since they were sacked for breaking the law. As Oregon’s drug laws were “neutral” and “generally applicable” and did not target any particular religion, they did not violate the constitution. Mere incidental burdens on one’s religious practice are inevitable and cannot be considered infringements on religious liberty. Smith was unpopular, and Congress soon passed the Religious Freedom Restoration Act (RFRA) to restore a higher level of protection for religious free exercise. The Supreme Court partially struck down RFRA in 1997, finding its strictures with regard to state governments to exceed Congress’s power. The upshot: the law continues to bind the federal government but no longer limits the power of states to impinge on the religious lives of its inhabitants. So in line with Smith, the Oregon Court of Appeals rejected the Sweetcakes owners’ religious liberty claim. The fine “does not impermissibly burden the Kleins' right to the free exercise”, the court held, “because it simply requires their compliance with a neutral law of general applicability, and the Kleins have made no showing that the state targeted them for enforcement because of their religious beliefs”. Many commentators and several justices have had unkind words for Smith over the years. In his Masterpiece Cakeshop concurrence, Justice Neil Gorsuch (who sits in the Smith author’s old chair) wrote “Smith remains controversial in many quarters”. And in January, Justice Samuel Alito (joined by Justices Gorsuch, Kavanaugh and Clarence Thomas) wrote the decision “drastically cut back on the protection provided by the Free Exercise Clause”. Smith is an “anomaly”, the Kleins say, and should be abandoned. In a season when the court is showing new vigour for overturning precedent (prompting an outcry from Justice Stephen Breyer on May 13th), several justices may be seriously be thinking about granting a hearing to Klein to add Smith to the ash heap of abandoned rulings. But the Supreme Court has been tarrying on whether to take the case onto its docket. At the justices' private conference on May 16th, Klein appeared on the “discuss list” for the ninth time since the beginning of March.