ONE DAY after the opposition announced its final push to oust Nicolás Maduro, Venezuela’s strongman was determined to show he was back in control. He duly adopted the method his regime knows best: rapid, forceful repression of protests. The early signs are that he is succeeding. On April 30th Juan Guaidó, recognised by most Western and Latin American democracies as the country’s interim president, had appeared before the walls of La Carlota airbase with a group of military defectors to announce “Operation Liberty”. He promised to mobilise the “biggest march in Venezuelan history” to prise apart the cracks in the regime.  But when pro-opposition protesters approached the base again on May 1st they were dispersed by a rain of teargas canisters the moment they began aiming stones at the conscripts inside. Similarly, a demonstration in the working-class district of El Paraiso had barely started before the National Guard started firing teargas and plastic bullets. “We can't put up with this anymore,” said Maria Isabel Salas, 58, a housewife, who joined the protests despite admitting her fear. “This government is no use for anything. I want them to know that.” As Wednesday’s protest began, Mr Guaidó told supporters that the end is “just around the corner”. He said that in the coming days a programme of “staggered strikes” would begin, leading up to a national strike at an unspecified date. But there was no sign of any more rebel soldiers joining his side. And Leopoldo López, an opposition leader who had dramatically slipped away from his house arrest to appear next to Mr Guaidó, did not resurface. He was sheltering in the Spanish embassy. About two dozen rebel national guardsmen soldiers are believed to be in the Brazilian embassy. Mr Maduro has vowed to pursue all of those behind the uprising. “This will not go unpunished,” he said. “I have chosen three prosecutors...who will interrogate all people involved. They will launch criminal prosecutions for the serious crimes that have been committed against the constitution, the rule of law and the right to peace.” Mr Maduro, who started his second term in January after winning a sham election, has plunged the country into economic misery. But despite the discontent, and occasional defection of groups of soldiers, the regime has so far managed to keep the loyalty of most of the army. The faltering uprising confirmed just how hard Mr Guaidó will find it to win over commanders, even though he has offered soldiers who switch sides amnesty. Many benefit from the regime’s cronyism, and some are too deeply implicated in criminal activities to qualify for amnesty. Speaking shortly after the start of the demonstration, John Bolton, America’s National Security adviser, claimed that the uprising, planned over many months, had not gone as intended. He said that Maikel Moreno, the head of Venezuela’s supreme court, which has up till now acted as a regime puppet, was expected to declare Mr Maduro’s national constituent assembly illegitimate. This would have given legal cover to Vladimir Padrino, the defence minister, and the high command, to throw their support behind Mr Guaidó and the opposition-controlled national assembly. “For reasons that are still not clear, that didn’t go forward yesterday,” Mr Bolton said. He blamed Russian and Cuban interference for dissuading Mr Maduro from fleeing to Cuba. Another explanation for the lack of army defections comes from Venezuelan military sources. It holds that this plan was due to be put into effect on May 2nd and that Mr Guaidó and Mr López jumped the gun, prompting the high command to back off. It is not the first time that the opposition has seemingly overplayed its hand. Some sections of it have long believed that pressure from the streets is sufficient to overthrow Mr Maduro. So far, it has not been. “When the opposition feels it has an advantage it always goes for the kill shot and fails,” says a former American official. The uprising did not leave the regime unshaken. It took Mr Maduro a day to appear in public. And General Manuel Figuera, who was sacked as head of SEBIN, the intelligence service, because of his apparent support for the uprising, seemed to confirm Mr Bolton’s accounts of regime disloyalty. A letter written to Mr Maduro and attributed to General Figuera said: “I discovered that many people you trust are negotiating behind your back.” Whether the dictator can still trust General Padrino, Mr Moreno and the others after they were supposedly outed by Mr Bolton must now be open to doubt. But the biggest blow struck on Tuesday was to the momentum of the opposition. It was only in February that Mr Guaidó’s attempt to bring in humanitarian aid from Colombia, watched by the world’s media, failed. More than three months after he proclaimed himself interim president, with the backing of the national assembly as well as of the United States and over 50 other countries, the regime has not collapsed. The longer the stand-off continues, the more problematic the strategy of President Donald Trump’s administration becomes. On May 1st, America’s Secretary of State, Mike Pompeo, told broadcasters that American military action is possible in Venezuela. But that would be a bad idea. It would feed into the regime’s claims that America is trying to take over the country in order to quash the socialist revolution ushered in by Mr Maduro’s predecessor, Hugo Chávez. And support for America among ordinary Venezuelans may anyway be on the wane. Though the regimes of Mr Maduro and Chávez brought about Venezuela’s economic collapse, American sanctions on Venezuelan oil, which came into effect fully this week, will aggravate the country’s humanitarian crisis. Unless the stand-off is resolved soon, there is a risk that any transitional government, if and when it happens, will inherit a pauperised state. What is not in doubt is the determination of the Trump administration to get rid of Mr Maduro’s regime. Having joined this battle, it is one the administration cannot afford to lose. Mr Maduro could be gone tomorrow, or he could still be there at Christmas. In that case the administration would face a choice: either make good on Mr Trump’s threats of military action, which enjoy no support in Latin America nor among the Democrats, or hold its nose and negotiate directly with him the terms of his departure.