ON MAY 18th, shortly after he finished reading the Mueller Report, Justin Amash, a five-term representative from Michigan, became the first Republican in Congress to call for the impeachment of President Donald Trump. In a lengthy Twitter thread Mr Amash argued that Mr Trump’s conduct had met the constitutional standard for impeachment—and that William Barr, the attorney-general, had “misled the public” about the special counsel’s findings over the president’s apparent “high Crimes and Misdemeanors.” “While impeachment should be undertaken only in extraordinary circumstances, the risk we face in an environment of extreme partisanship is not that Congress will employ it as a remedy too often but rather that Congress will employ it so rarely that it cannot deter misconduct,” wrote Mr Amash. He added that few members of Congress had read the report.  Mr Amash, who in 2010 became the youngest member of Congress when he was elected in the Tea Party wave that crashed over America, has been a rare Republican critic of Mr Trump. In 2016, shortly after Mr Trump was elected, Mr Amash accused him of having an “extra-constitutional” view of presidency. “He seems to believe that government works like a business and he is the CEO of the business, and that is not how it works,” he said. A staunch libertarian—Mr Amash co-founded the House Freedom Caucus to represent small-government Tea Partiers on the Hill—he has openly disagreed with Mr Trump on other matters, including the president’s declaration of a national emergency earlier this year. With Mr Trump enjoying an approval rating among Republicans of 90%, Mr Amash is unlikely to receive the backing of any of his Republican colleagues. Some quickly attacked Mr Amash. “What he wants is attention in this process,” said Kevin McCarthy, the House minority leader. “He’s not a criminal attorney. He’s never met Mueller. He’s never met Barr. And now he’s coming forward with this?” (Mr Amash is an attorney; meeting the special counsel, let alone the attorney-general, is not a precondition for taking a view of Mr Mueller’s conclusions.) Mr Trump also accused Mr Amash of attention-seeking. He was “never a fan,” he tweeted, of the “total lightweight who opposes me and some of our great Republican ideas and policies just for the sake of getting his name out there through controversy”. So it was left to the Democrats (aside from a few Never Trump Republican exiles in the media) to hail Mr Amash’s courage. His move comes as a boost to those in the opposition party who are pushing, against the wishes of their party leaders, to begin impeachment proceedings against Mr Trump. Nancy Pelosi, the House majority leader, has said such a process would have to be bipartisan. Rashida Tlaib, a Democratic congresswoman from Michigan, who has formally submitted her own impeachment resolution, invited Mr Amash to join her. “You are putting country first and that is to be commended,” she tweeted. “We both took an oath to uphold the US constitution”. Absent further support from other Republicans, Mr Amash’s move is unlikely to make impeachment proceedings any more likely. Mrs Pelosi continues to believe that trying and failing to impeach Mr Trump would inflict grave electoral damage on her party in 2020. Adam Schiff, the Democratic chair of the House intelligence committee, said at the weekend that “what may be pushing us in the direction of impeachment…has less to do with Justin Amash and more to do with the fact that the administration is engaging in a maximum obstructionism campaign against Congress”. The likeliest consequence for Mr Amash is that he will lose his seat, in Michigan’s third congressional district. On May 19th, Jim Lower, a state representative, said he would challenge Mr Amash in next year’s Republican primary. “I am a Pro-Trump, Pro-Life, Pro-Jobs, Pro-2nd Amendment, Pro-Family Values Republican,” he said. “Justin Amash’s tweets yesterday calling for President Trump’s impeachment show how out of touch he is with the truth and how out of touch he is with people he represents.” He told the Washington Post he had not read the Mueller report in as much detail as Mr Amash had done. The budding primary contest could emerge as test of whether Republicans critical of Mr Trump can still win elections. Alternatively, Mr Amash may have his eye on a bigger prize. He is reportedly considering a 2020 run against Mr Trump as a Libertarian candidate. He might not need to do particularly well to create a problem for the president. As a hardline conservative, he could take the votes of disaffected Republicans. Even if he only performed well at home in Michigan, a crucial swing state that Mr Trump won by a whisker in 2016, it could undo Mr Trump’s chances of re-election. “I never stop thinking about these sorts of things,” Mr Amash told CNN earlier this year. “It's not because I have any immediate plans or anything like that, but I never stop thinking about those things because there is a big problem with the current two-party system we have, and someone has to shake it up.”