FEW POLITICIANS like to be made fun of. Even fewer can stomach a character assassination. It takes a singular statesman to announce a leadership bid mere days after the premiere of a satirical play labelling him “one of the most divisive politicians of our time”. At the Park Theatre in London “The Last Temptation of Boris Johnson” dramatises the fateful dinner party in 2016 at which Mr Johnson (Will Barton), goaded by fellow Tory MP Michael Gove (Dugald Bruce-Lockhart) and Evgeny Lebedev (Tim Wallers), a media mogul, decided to campaign for Brexit. Its second act imagines the fall-out in 2029, when Johnson is weighing up his chances of gaining power on a platform of “Breentry”. Written by Jonathan Maitland, a former BBC journalist, the play’s stated aim is to peel back Mr Johnson’s buffoonish exterior to expose a man “substantially motivated by personal ambition”. Throughout the play the character is haunted by the ghosts of prime ministers past: Tony Blair, Margaret Thatcher and Winston Churchill (of whom Mr Johnson wrote a bestselling biography). Each of them brow-beats Boris with their own views on Brexit, and he seems to emerge from these encounters not as a scheming Machiavelli but as a man tormented by contradictory advice.  Mr Barton uncannily replicates BoJo’s behavioural tics—the hair-ruffling, the bumbling gait, the posh speaking-voice and the ums and ahs—but he is given little else to work with. The play makes minimal effort to probe the man’s inner life, or question how affected these habits are (the hair-ruffling, it has been reported, is one of his ways of cultivating a disarming charm). Just before the interval, Johnson breaks from dinner to deliver a cod-Shakespearean soliloquy. At last he divulges a yearning for power but before his confession has had time to percolate, he distracts from it with humour. He mounts the kitchen counter, a bike helmet his crown, an orange his orb, a serving spoon his sceptre. The audience laughs, and any serious considerations of his character are forgotten. If the play’s first act is toothless satire, its second is rip-roaring farce. History repeats itself—another maddening interview with the BBC, another sex scandal, another leadership bid—now with clownish exaggeration. The plot dissolves into incoherence: in one scene Johnson, Blair, Thatcher and Churchill perform the hokey-cokey; in another, Johnson gets into a televised punch-up with Gove. “The Last Temptation of Boris Johnson” ends with things crashing down, quite literally, around the titular character. Perhaps the play disappoints because Mr Johnson is not the “perfect subject”, as the playwright claims, but rather an impossible one. Trying to skewer him is the equivalent of trying to nail jelly to a wall. The politician knows that ridicule cannot hurt you if you’re willing to laugh at yourself: from dangling on zip wires to rugby tackling ten-year-olds, he is always in on the joke. Mr Johnson refuses to be ashamed of his personal or professional failures. Satires only serve to boost Mr Johnson’s comedic capital and, with it, his political magnetism. Mr Maitland has said that “if there were a leadership election during the run, I’d be jumping for joy” and it seems he will get his wish. Towards the end of “The Last Temptation of Boris Johnson”, the Conservative chief whip (Arabella Weir) assures Johnson that people would vote for him for one simple reason: they know who he is. Last week Telegraph columnist Tim Stanley instructed the Tories to “send for Boris”, writing that “the fact that I don’t have to use his surname speaks volumes”; meanwhile, the Sun insisted that “nobody else...is even recognisable to the voting public.” In that respect a retelling of his life and times—no matter how unsympathetic—will help, not hinder, him. “The Last Temptation of Boris Johnson” continues at the Park Theatre, London, until June 8th