TEENAGERS THINK they know everything (much to their parents’ chagrin). Graduates in Britain actually do know much more than they need to in order to do their jobs, and so earn less than they could. These are the depressing findings of a study by the Office for National Statistics, a British government agency. It looked at population surveys from 2006 to 2017 and compared academic attainment of workers against the average educational level for their occupation. It found that 34% of those who graduated after 2007 were overeducated for their jobs, compared with 22% of those who left university before 1992. The most overeducated age cohort is 35- to 49-year-olds, with men and women equally affected. Migrants tend to be the most overeducated, as are people working in London (where most migrants live).  Overeducation can happen for different reasons. Graduates may not have enough information about job opportunities to find a job that fits their academic qualifications. Or there may be an oversupply of educated people in the labour market. But the consequences are bad for both employers and employees. Being overeducated for a job means that people do not use the skills they learnt at university, hurting productivity and wages. Overeducated workers earn between 3% and 8% less compared with the wage of a worker with a similar level of education who is matched to the right job. But all this bad news doesn’t weaken the overall case for staying in education. Data from the Department of Education released this month show that the median graduate salary in Britain for workers aged 16 to 64 was $13,170 more than that of non-graduates. The disparity was greatest for postgraduates: they take home an additional $7,900 a year. The Institute of Fiscal Studies has found that the wage premium is particularly marked for women: holders of degrees earn on average 28% more than those without such qualifications (there is an 8% premium for men). That is probably related to the fact that non-graduate women have children earlier and are more likely to be in part-time work. Overeducation is a problem, then, but it still pays to study.