JAMES WILSON, who signed the Declaration of Independence and assumed one of the Supreme Court’s first six seats, believed that “the house of representatives [shall] form the grand inquest of the state. They shall diligently inquire into grievances”. More than a century later, Woodrow Wilson, then a young scholar of American government, wrote that for a legislature, “vigilant oversight” is “quite as important as legislation.” Multiple Supreme Court decisions have similarly affirmed that Congress enjoys vast investigative and oversight powers. Sometimes partisanship influences those powers. A Democrat-dominated Congress investigated Richard Nixon, a Republican. During the Clinton administration, the Republican-led House held hearings on the Clintons’ Christmas-card list, and issued more than 1,000 subpoenas. Presidents may have fought specific requests, but none have done what Donald Trump has: declare “we’re fighting all the subpoenas,” sue to block them and instruct officials to ignore them. He seems to feel that partisanship renders oversight illegitimate. American history, jurisprudence and norms do not share that view. If it prevails, it risks dramatically removing constraints on future presidents’ power.  Of course, Congressional oversight power is not limitless. In 1954, the House Un-American Activities Committee convicted John Watkins, a labour-union organiser, of contempt of Congress for refusing to testify about people who had left the Communist Party (he was candid about his own past). The Supreme Court sided with Watkins, holding that Congress cannot “expose the private affairs of individuals without justification,” and that “no inquiry is an end in itself; it must be related to, and in furtherance of, a legitimate task of Congress.” Steven Mnuchin, the treasury secretary, hinted at this exception when, on May 6th, he declined to release six years of Mr Trump’s personal tax returns, as well as those from several of his businesses, to Richard Neal, who chairs the House Ways and Means Committee. A law passed in 1924 states that the head of America’s Internal Revenue Service (IRS) “shall furnish…any return or return information” to the House Ways and Means Committee specified by written request.” Mr Neal did just that, but Mr Mnuchin wrote that he “determined that the Committee’s request lacks a legitimate legislative purpose.” Mr Neal said that his committee must determine whether the IRS has properly audited Mr Trump. Some may find that justification thin, but the Supreme Court ruled that congressional investigations enjoy a presumption of legitimacy, and courts are reluctant to intervene based on legislative motives. A recent report from the nonpartisan Congressional Research Service noted the privacy concerns inherent to releasing Mr Trump’s tax returns (they will almost certainly leak), but those are counterbalanced by what the Supreme Court has called the “indispensable ‘informing function of Congress’”. A federal court may soon adjudicate this dispute. They are adjudicating others, too. On April 29th, Mr Trump, along with three of his children and several of his business entities, sued Deutsche Bank and Capital One to stop their compliance with “Congressional subpoenas that have no legitimate or lawful purpose.” That came a week after Mr Trump and several of his businesses sued Elijah Cummings, who chairs the House Oversight Committee, to block Mazars, an accounting firm, from complying with Mr Cummings’s subpoena for records. Mr Trump argues that these subpoenas “have no legitimate or lawful purpose,” and “were issued to harass” him. Many presidents feel that way. Partisan and interbranch competition are both inherent to America’s political system. Presidents have the right to keep some things secret, just as Congress has the right to investigate; those rights often conflict. But Mr Trump’s response—a wholesale rejection of Congress’s oversight power—is unprecedented. As Margaret Taylor, a fellow in Governance Studies at the Brookings Institution, notes, “There is a long tradition of back-and-forth between the legislative and executive branches...especially when the parties are different...What’s different here is the full frontal stiff-arm of the House’s oversight efforts.” That makes reaching an accommodation impossible. As one former counsel to a Republican president explained, “It’s not uncommon for a president to say, ‘No way no how am I going to share that information with Congress—they just want to hurt me. Often from that point you can manouevre to a point of agreement. [But] it takes effort and willingness to compromise…[and] the current situation doesn’t seem to have any of the hallmarks of compromise.” Nor is this battle only taking place in the courts. On May 7th the White House blocked Don McGahn, a former White House counsel, from surrendering documents subpoenaed by the House Judiciary Committee because of possible executive-privilege concerns. Mr McGahn complied, but as a former rather than current White House official, his compliance was voluntary rather than compulsory. One day later, the White House also claimed executive privilege over the unredacted version of Robert Mueller’s report, and the House Judiciary Committee recommended finding William Barr, the attorney-general, in contempt of Congress for failing to deliver it in response to a subpoena. Also on May 8th, the Republican-led Senate Intelligence Committee subpoenaed Donald Trump junior to answer questions about his prior testimony. It is unclear whether Mr Trump’s executive-privilege claims will survive court challenges. Much of Mr Mueller’s report concerns actions taken before Mr Trump became president, which executive privilege cannot shield. The White House cited no justification for shielding the full Mueller Report other than calling its action “protective,” which implies that the president can withhold any information for any reason. Courts have not endorsed that view. Judges rejected both George W Bush’s claim that executive privilege blocks aides from appearing before Congress (though it may prevent them from answering specific questions) and Barack Obama’s over information that had already been revealed—a ruling that may apply to Mr McGahn, who spoke extensively with Mr Mueller, and to Mr Mueller’s report, most of which has already been released. Court challenges take time, which works to Mr Trump’s advantage. He can portray them as the actions of spiteful Democrats eager to avenge their 2016 loss, while running out the clock until after the next election, when the subpoenas expire, or at least until public attention moves on. But that is a minor risk compared to the precedent that would be set if Mr Trump faces no consequences for ignoring congressional subpoenas--an action that formed the basis for the third article of impeachment drawn up against Richard Nixon. A private citizen who ignores a subpoena can be jailed; though some Democrats have mooted dusting off Congress’s “inherent contempt” power to detain contemnors, that is unlikely to happen soon. Since Watergate, presidents have felt obligated to at least appear to comply with Congress’s oversight power, even as they negotiated the most favourable possible terms. Mr Trump feels no such pressure. That risks permanently weakening Congress’s oversight capacity, and rendering presidential power virtually unrestrained. If his party controls Congress, it will line up behind him; if it does not, he can just ignore their toothless demands. Says the former Republican White House counsel, “The next president and the next one after that and so on would have an additional precedent to say, ‘Subpoenas? Contempt? That’s just a vote; that’s just a political act. Nothing for me to worry about.’”