“SOMETIMES THE majors are the easiest ones to win,” Brooks Koepka said last week. “Half the people shoot themselves out of it, and mentally I know I can beat most of them.” It sounded like a preposterous boast. The four major championships in men’s golf feature virtually all of the world’s best players, making them vastly harder to win than weekly tour events against comparatively soft competition are. But five days later, Mr Koepka proved himself right. After prevailing in the PGA Championship on May 19th, he has now won four of the past eight majors he has entered (and four of 22 overall). In contrast, outside of the majors, he has amassed just five other titles through 122 tournaments on top-tier tours. Mr Koepka’s victory appeared preordained for most of the event. Its organisers ensured that he would be in the spotlight from his very first shot by putting him in a playing group with Tiger Woods, still the sport’s biggest star, and Francesco Molinari. Between them, that trio held the non-calendar-year grand slam: Mr Koepka was the reigning U.S. Open and PGA Championship victor, Mr Molinari won Britain’s Open Championship in July and Mr Woods triumphed at the Masters last month. Moreover, each member of the group had suffered at least one close loss to another during those four events.  Yet despite the résumés of his playing partners, Mr Koepka blew them away—along with everyone else. He shot a course-record 63 in the first round on the notoriously difficult Bethpage Black Course, and followed it up with a sterling 65 in the second. With booming drives that regularly left Mr Woods’s and Mr Molinari’s balls 30 yards in the rearview mirror; pinpoint approach shots that honed in on flagsticks like laser-guided missiles; and putts whose lines never seemed to waver; Mr Koepka seemed to be playing a different game from his rivals. The last time a golfer looked that dominant may have been the heyday of Mr Woods, Mr Koepka’s playing partner, who wound up missing the cut just five weeks after he beat Mr Koepka by one stroke at the Masters. Mr Koepka would go on to need almost all seven strokes of the lead he had amassed at the tournament’s halfway mark. He completed the third round in a steady, even-par 70, preserving a seven-stroke advantage going into the final day. Upon reaching the back nine on Sunday, however, he came dangerously close to earning a spot on the list of golf’s most epic collapses. A series of errant tee shots—some captured by the fast-gusting wind, some simply mis-hit—resulted in a ghastly run of four consecutive bogeys on the 11th through 14th holes. Meanwhile, Dustin Johnson, the world’s top-ranked player at the start of the tournament, birdied the 15th after playing the front nine in three under par. For a moment, Mr Koepka’s lead had dwindled to a single stroke. At that point, EAGLE, The Economist’s golf-forecasting system, gave Mr Johnson a 37% chance of completing a comeback victory—an outcome that had seemed unthinkable just an hour earlier. Had Mr Koepka’s back-nine jitters befallen anyone but a three-time major winner, fans and pundits would surely have called him a choker. Mr Koepka never re-discovered his early-round magic after that point. He gave back another stroke with a bogey on the 17th hole, and flirted with disaster on the 18th by propelling his final tee shot into the gallery. But Mr Johnson could not sustain his momentum, over-shooting the green on the 16th hole and missing a seven-foot putt on the 17th to record back-to-back bogeys of his own. With a Houdini-like recovery to save par on the 18th, Mr Koepka staggered into the clubhouse with a four-over-par 74—and a second consecutive inscription on the Wanamaker Trophy. A major conundrumAs far as the record books are concerned, a major win is a major win is a major win. Just 19 other players can match Mr Koepka’s four titles on golf’s biggest stages. And at just 29 years of age, he has plenty of time to move further up the list. Moreover, although Mr Koepka’s near-collapse in the final hours of the PGA Championship may taint fans’ memories of his triumph, he deserves credit for his sublime play during the first two rounds, which allowed him to weather the coming storm. Overall, he beat the average score of players making the cut by a healthy 14.5 strokes, a sufficiently large margin to win a major most of the time. Nonetheless, Mr Koepka’s self-inflicted close call demonstrated the occasionally erratic character that caused both The Economist and other statistical forecasters to preach caution on his chances. It would be an exaggeration to describe Mr Koepka as golf’s version of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde: he has no shortage of top-five and top-ten finishes outside of major competition. But the gap between his merely-strong work on the weekly grind and his otherworldly performances in majors remains a remarkable anomaly. Since Mr Koepka first entered the top 100 of the official world rankings, the average of his 409 round scores outside of major play corresponds to a performance 0.88 strokes above par per round in a typical modern major environment. That is roughly the level one would expect from a player ranked between 20th and 25th in the world. In contrast, his average showing across 77 major rounds (after adjusting for course difficulty) comes to 0.75 strokes below par per 18 holes—a threshold exceeded in modern times across majors and non-majors alike only by Mr Woods. The difference between those two figures, of 1.63 strokes per round, is the largest of any player with at least 25 rounds played in both majors and non-majors while in the top 100 since 2006. Could such a large discrepancy really be a mere statistical fluke? It would stand to reason that some players might prepare the same way for every tournament, whereas others might devote extra effort when the biggest prizes are on the line. Moreover, quality of competition is not the only difference between majors and other events. In addition, the organisers of major tournaments typically choose and prepare the courses in order to provide an unusually difficult test. And powerful golfers, exemplified by the chiselled Mr Koepka, may have playing styles that are particularly well-suited to the souped-up challenge that major courses present. “On easier courses,” Henrik Stenson, the winner of the 2016 Open Championship, told Golf magazine, “where there is not such a penalty for bad drives and many players have wedges into greens, it is much harder for [Mr Koepka] to separate himself. A really tough setup brings out Brooks’s advantages. He’s so straight off the tee he is going to hit many more fairways than the average player. And he’s so long he’ll have less club into the green so he’ll hit it closer. If he misses the fairway he still has less club and he’s so strong he can muscle the shot onto the green when others can’t.” The ayes have itThe evidence suggests that Mr Stenson is on to something. To test whether golfers who have performed far better or worse in majors than in other events can be expected to sustain such a discrepancy, I started with a “naïve” version of our EAGLE prediction model. This system forecasts players’ future scores based on their past ones, without taking account of whether those previous results occurred in majors or elsewhere. For every round by every player in every tournament since 2008, I then compared the player’s round score with what EAGLE would have predicted before they teed off, and recorded the difference between the expected and actual outcome. Next, for each round by each player, I took the average of these differences for all previous rounds they had played, broken out into major and non-major categories. For example, before the PGA Championship began, Mr Koepka had beaten EAGLE’s forecasts in majors by exactly 100 strokes over 80 previous rounds, an average of 1.25 strokes per major round. He had also exceeded EAGLE’s predictions outside of majors by 95 strokes, nearly as large a margin. However, it took him 506 non-major rounds to amass that 95-stroke gap, resulting in a far lower average of 0.19 strokes per non-major round. The gap between these two averages, of 1.06 strokes per round, represents how much Mr Koepka has elevated his game when under the sport’s brightest spotlight, compared with his work when the stakes are lower. Finally, I measured whether this differential could be used to improve EAGLE’s predictions in major tournaments. The result was a resounding “yes”. After about 70 rounds’ worth of major play, golfers “carried forward” about a quarter of their historical over- or under-performance in majors to their next major round. With 200 rounds (roughly 15 years) of data, the ratio was 50-50. To make sure this apparent pattern was not driven entirely by Mr Koepka’s extreme split, I excluded him from the dataset and re-ran the analysis. Although the effect was slightly smaller, it remained significant. Relative to all of the other elements in golf forecasting, this is a fairly modest finding. In the case of Mr Koepka, who is the biggest outlier by far, it means that we should expect #MajorKoepka (as we fondly dubbed him on Twitter) to perform about a third of a stroke per round better than the mere-mortal version of Mr Koepka who shows up in non-major events. A shift of one-third of a stroke per round is closer to the difference between a major and, say, a mid-ranking captain than it is to the gap between a major and a lowly private. Nonetheless, it is enough to catapult Mr Koepka from sixth in EAGLE’s rankings to second (though not enough to overtake Mr Johnson, who also benefits somewhat from the adjustment). In contrast, Paul Casey, whom we highlighted before the PGA Championship as under-valued by betting markets, loses 0.15 strokes per round from this correction, dropping him from 12th in EAGLE’s rankings to 18th. For the bulk of his career, Mr Woods has played at the same high level regardless of the stakes, and is thus unaffected. In the wake of Mr Woods’s victory at the Masters, we stubbornly insisted that our bearishness on him before the tournament was justified, and that we would continue to wager against him going forward at the prevailing betting-market odds. His poor showing when playing alongside Mr Koepka at the PGA Championship offered a small drop of vindication. This time, however, it appears we were wrong to pooh-pooh Mr Koepka’s penchant for bringing his “A” game when major titles are on the line. Look for him to shoot up our projected leaderboard when he seeks to defend his U.S. Open title at Pebble Beach next month.