ANTI-ABORTION POLICIES are on the rise in America. Influenced mainly by objections from religious conservatives, legislators in states such as Georgia, Ohio and Alabama have passed new laws limiting the practice. In some instances, the new regulations go so far as to ban abortions even in cases of rape or incest—a measure supported by just 11% of voters, according to Morning Consult, a pollster. Restricting access to abortions means that more parents who don’t want to raise children would be forced to do so. Recent research suggests this could reverse decades of progress made on curbing crime in America. In a paper published in 2001, the economists John Donahue and Steven Levitt credited the legalisation of abortion across America with much of the subsequent reduction in crime in the country. They argued that violent crime in states where abortion had been banned before 1973 was 15-25% rarer in 1997 than it would have been had abortion remained illegal. The study was politically explosive, and widely criticised. Many sceptical scholars sought to poke holes in its methods, including one group who discovered an “inadvertent but serious computer programming error” (see article) underlying its findings.  Nearly two decades later, Messrs Donahue and Levitt have returned to the subject, and present new evidence that bolsters their original claim. In a new working paper circulated by the National Bureau of Economic Research, they attribute a whopping 45 percentage points of the total 50% decline in crime since 1990 to legal abortion. Their primary evidence is that crime fell much faster in states where more abortions were performed than it did in those where the procedure was rarer. In the early 1990s violent crime was about 50% more common in states with relatively high abortion levels than it was in those where abortion was infrequent. By 2014, crime rates in the two groups of states had converged. The authors argue that this statistical association reflects an underlying causal relationship. Armed with a cache of annual state-level data on abortions, crime rates and other factors—including economic conditions, welfare payments, access to firearms and alcohol consumption—they seek to isolate the impact of abortion on violent crime, after controlling for other variables that also affect crime rates. With all other factors held constant, they find that an increase in the abortion rate of 100 per 100,000 births leads to a 10-20% reduction in crime. Past studies have also shown that children born to women who wanted an abortion but did not receive one were much more likely to become criminals and had poorer life prospects than those who were born to parents ready and willing to raise them.