THE LAST dragon has flown away. The army of undead White Walkers has been defeated. The Iron Throne has melted. After eight seasons “Game of Thrones”, HBO’s biggest-ever show, came to an end on May 19th. The last series caused fury among devoted fans, with more than 1m people signing a petition to have the season redrafted by “more competent” screenwriters. Some, given the chance, might make the producers re-enact the “walk of shame” suffered by Cersei Lannister, a key character, in season five (she was made to pass through a crowd naked while being pelted with rotten fruit). It is hard not to feel some sympathy for David Benioff and D.B. Weiss, the showrunners. As anyone who has read the books can attest, George R.R. Martin constructed an enormous, sprawling story with a bewildering cast of characters and a weird mix of politics, sex, gory violence and magic. It was never going to be easy to tie these elements together to make a satisfactory ending. Mr Martin has amply demonstrated that himself. He published the first book in 1996 and the fifth (of a planned seven) in 2011, but is yet to complete the saga.  The controversy should not overshadow the show’s success in creating an unmissable cultural event. “Game of Thrones” was the kind of series that schoolchildren would discuss at break time and office workers would chat about by the kettle. Critics devoted thousands of words to finding hidden clues and unpicking symbolism. Children were named after the central characters—a decision parents would often come to regret—and President Donald Trump used the imagery of the series to illustrate his political messages. In the binge-watching era, viewers waited patiently for each week’s instalment; fans outside America were forced into drastic action to avoid spoilers on social media. (Note to Twitter: there is no point allowing users to mute words when you list spoilers in the “Trending” column.) And, of course, the series inspired a subculture of those who proudly proclaim that they never watched an episode. What explains the show’s success? A crucial component came from the books: Mr Martin’s willingness to kill off important characters. Sean Bean was the biggest star of the first series and, as the noble Ned Stark, seemed set to be the hero of the saga. But he was executed early on, while his wife and son were dispatched in the “Red Wedding” bloodbath in season three. Ever since no character has seemed safe. Viewers have been kept in a state of nervous tension. Second, the political struggle at the heart of the series had broader resonance. Mr Martin based his saga loosely on the Wars of the Roses in England in the 15th century, when rival families battled for the throne. But it is not hard to find echoes of the 20th century too, with the Starks as the English, complete with Northern accents, and the blond, ruthless Lannisters as the Germans. The latter could only be defeated by bringing in the forces of the “new world”, as represented by Daenerys and her dragons. Victory was achieved but only at a terrible cost; the destruction by fire of King’s Landing in the final series, which could be compared with the bombing of Dresden, or Hiroshima. Another theme, manifest in the oft-repeated warning “winter is coming”, was climate change. For much of the series, the rival families ignored (and indeed ridiculed) the threat posed by the White Walkers, an invading army from the frozen north. Third, the series was a meditation on the nature of leadership. Ned Stark’s noble honesty was shown to be too naive; the callous rule of the Lannisters meant their subjects showed them no loyalty; the messianic appeal of Daenerys led the character to morph into a fanatical dictator. In some cases, the characters lost all morality in their pursuit of the Iron Throne, as best demonstrated when Stannis Baratheon burned his daughter alive in a desperate attempt to boost his chances. Alas, the show eventually awarded the kingdom to its single most irritating character, Bran Stark, a crippled boy who spoke only in fortune-cookie aphorisms. The only redeeming feature of this denouement was that Bran was shown to be a figurehead, guided by the show’s best character, Tyrion, the hard-drinking, wise-cracking dwarf played by Peter Dinklage. Yet the best way of explaining the show’s success was that it was an elaborate soap opera, in the style of “Dallas” or “Dynasty”, two series that also featured battling families. Like those shows, “Game of Thrones” had larger-than-life heroes and villains, whom viewers could cheer and boo from the sidelines. Soap operas are designed never to end and “Game of Thrones” fans would only have been happy, one suspects, if the series had been extended by a final twist, so their favourite characters could bicker and conspire for a few more years. As it is, there are various prequels in the works. The decision of one of the Stark children, Arya, to set sail for unknown lands to the west suggests the possibility of a spin-off that echoes Europe’s colonial expansion in the 16th century. But it will be a miracle if any show can make the same cultural impact as “Game of Thrones”.