ONCE IT became clear that Joe Biden was running for president, the chances that Terry McAuliffe, the former governor of Virginia, would go after the Democratic nomination himself evaporated. Mr Biden, the former vice-president, fills a lane Mr McAuliffe believed could have given him some running room: centre-left in a field of mostly hard-left candidates. Now Mr McAuliffe, a long-time ally of the Clintons, has chosen a different path, returning to his former role as a high-decibel, energetic fundraiser and organiser for the Democratic Party. Mr McAuliffe, who was elected governor in 2013, was a front man for Bill and Hillary Clinton in their presidential campaigns. He once called himself a “salesman” and Bill Clinton’s presidency was his “product”.  “I’m staying home to do what I need to do to help Virginians,” he told CNN in late April after announcing he would serve as campaigner in chief for Democrats running for the House and Senate in elections in November. The elections could scarcely be more important. The anti-Trump tsunami that in 2016 tipped Virginia to Hillary Clinton—it was the only Southern state she carried—hit again in 2017. Ralph Northam was elected governor in a landslide and Democrats nearly took back the House of Delegates, the larger of the two legislative chambers, winning a stunning 15 seats. The shift won’t be complete until Democrats again control the legislature. They need two seats each in the House and Virginia Senate to end roughly two decades in the minority and give the party total sway over state government—the governorship, the legislature and the courts—for the first time in nearly 30 years. Ahead of big elections, governors tend to provide legislative caucuses and candidates with financial and infrastructural backing. But since admitting in February that he had donned blackface as a student, Mr Northam’s fundraising has atrophied. Despite polls that suggest Virginians want to move on from his embarrassment, the governor is a rare sight on the campaign trail. Things could improve for Mr Northam. There are signs his fundraising is picking up. He may become more visible on the campaign trail. And recent breakthroughs in policy, from road financing to criminal sentencing, are reminders that Mr Northam remains an effective governor. But with his popularity dented among younger, rigidly liberal voters who constitute a fast-growing slice of the electorate, Democrats are looking to other big names to fill the void. They include the state’s two US senators—Mark Warner and Tim Kaine—and three new members of the House delegation: Abigail Spanberger, Jennifer Wexton and Elaine Luria. All have successfully harnessed the Democratic Party’s largely suburban, increasingly multi-hued base and regularly communicate with it. And lending their names to those of legislative candidates potentially helps when they stand for re-election to Congress. But as members of Congress, they are subject to federal fundraising rules that limit how much cash they can generate for home-state candidates. Mr McAuliffe has no such encumbrances. In Virginia, there are no limits on fundraising or spending, freeing him to return to what he excelled at as candidate and governor: squeezing big-dollar contributions from business, interest groups and lobbyists. When he ran for governor, Mr McAuliffe raised $38m, nearly twice what his Republican opponent managed and about $4m more than Mr Northam collected for his campaign two years ago. Once in office, Mr McAuliffe set up a political treasury, in part to finance legislative candidates. It collected more than $10m. Thanks largely to gerrymandering, it did not achieve much: Republicans retained control of the General Assembly under his watch. The fund will be available to him now. In campaigning for legislative candidates, Mr McAuliffe will be talking up Mr Northam’s agenda and the promise of more achievements should voters install a Democratic majority. But Mr McAuliffe may also have to answer for his own embarrassments. As governor he was strong on job creation, laying the foundation for a deal, closed by Mr Northam, under which Amazon would locate its East Coast headquarters in Northern Virginia. The online giant vows to bring 25,000 jobs to the Washington, DC suburb over the next decade. But a much smaller project remains a big headache. Mr McAuliffe committed $1.4m in public funds to a proposed, Chinese-run factory in rural Virginia that would manufacture anti-pollution equipment for motor vehicles. The plant never opened and the company refused to return the money. Still, Democrats believe voters have a largely charitable opinion of Mr McAuliffe. His approval rating was just over 50% when he left the governorship—a job he loved and is not ruling out seeking again in 2021. Perhaps 2019 will be his warm-up.