Cities: The First 6,000 Years. By Monica Smith. Viking; 304 pages; $30. Simon & Schuster; £20 MONICA SMITH begins her provocative and engaging tour of 6,000 years of “crowd-based living” with a question: Why cities? The problems that arise from packing too many people into too small a space range from inadequate food supply and housing to unmanageable waste, not to mention disease, crime and the daily indignities of living on top of the neighbours. These difficulties began in ancient Mesopotamia, the Indus river valley, and in the sprawling metropolises of the Mayan and Aztec empires. And yet people continue to flock to urban centres, leaving friends and family behind to risk an uncertain future among strangers.  The answer, says Ms Smith, an archaeologist, is that cities are where the species fulfils its destiny. In Mexicali, to take one evocative example, young rural migrants call the move to the city “buscar la vida” (“to seek life”). Cities offer not only increased economic opportunity but also the possibility of reinvention. People who struggled to fit in when they lived in the countryside can often find in a city others who share their values or interests. In a village, “all the ties are strong (in some cases suffocatingly so)”, whereas in cities people “align with their commonalities rather than divide according to their differences”. Living among strangers is not a cause for despair but a chance to throw off the shackles of custom and kinship. Of course, city life can sometimes be unpleasant. The hustle can foster anxiety. Disease can spread easily in congested neighbourhoods. Newcomers sometimes find themselves no better off than they were in the countryside. All these problems were as familiar in imperial Rome as in Brazil’s favelas today. But Ms Smith is an optimist—perhaps to a fault. Even the worst blights, such as shanty towns and overflowing landfills are, for her, as much cause for celebration as worry. Admitting that much of the urban landscape consists of slums, she insists that “the steady influx of people to these areas of abject poverty demonstrates that even when city life is very unattractive, there’s still plenty that draws people in.” Waste is testament to “the spirit of consumption that has been part and parcel of every urban centre ever known”. Cast-offs are the byproduct of self-expression. A recurrent theme is the continuity of urban life across both time and space. When the conquistadors encountered the metropolises of the New World, they felt an instant sense of recognition. There were the same broad thoroughfares and marketplaces, grand religious buildings and crowded slums. Ms Smith thinks their “experiences with New World cities like Tenochtitlan and Cuzco provide the nearest thing to a laboratory condition for capturing the universality of the urban form”. Cities, she concludes, are often alike because they are all designed for the same purpose. People like to mingle with other people. Cities let that happen.