CHRISTIANITY IS the world’s most popular religion, with over 2bn followers, according to the Pew Research Centre, an American think-tank. It is the historically predominant faith in most prosperous democracies. Yet over the past century, only a limited number of Christians have gained commanding respect and influence for the way they lived out their faith, in their own countries and beyond. And many—most, even—have been idiosyncratic characters who have chosen to live outside most formal structures, or at the very edge of those structures, rather than mighty hierarchs of the church. Often they were people who had the option of living conventional, secure lives but at a certain point made radically different choices. One such person was Jean Vanier, who died this week. He was a Canadian diplomat’s son who served as a naval officer, then as a professor of theology and philosophy, but was inspired to change course after seeing the dreary conditions inside an institution for men with learning difficulties near Paris. That inspired him to open a home where people with mental-health or cognitive problems would be valued and invited to contribute to the community. He promoted an ethos than turned on its head the conventional notion of what it means to be normal and successful, and the result was a movement that eventually spread to 35 countries.  Another strange and charismatic (in several senses) character was Brother Roger (pictured with Mother Teresa), who became a kind of monk despite being born into a French-Swiss Protestant tradition in which monasticism hardly exists. As the founder of the Taizé community in eastern France, he was somehow able to communicate with a younger generation that was abandoning formal religion in droves, but still felt a kind of spiritual thirst. Like Vanier, he died in France at the age of 90, but the end of Roger’s life, after he was stabbed by a mentally disturbed Romanian woman, was far uglier. By the time of his passing in 2005, prayer groups modelled on his community had formed across North America. If his style of spiritual guidance had a hallmark, it was a willingness to listen as well as preach. Even harder to place in any box, perhaps, was Dorothy Day, a social and political activist who lived much of her life in rough areas of New York, where she rubbed shoulders with socialists, communists and hippies, while finding commonalities and differences with them all. As a founder of the Catholic Worker Movement, she declared herself a “pacifist even in the class struggle” although she professed to understand perfectly well why the poor wanted to rise up against their oppressors. It was a stance that exasperated both secular lefists and Christian conservatives, but her integrity compelled a grudging respect. For all her radicalism on economics, she adhered to Catholic teaching on sexual and reproductive issues, saying she regretted having an abortion. Utterly different as she was from the Catholic bishops of her day, she may eventually be proclaimed a saint. A process that could lead to canonising her began under Pope John Paul II in 2000. Yet another place on the spectrum of idiosyncratic sanctity was occupied by Mother Teresa, the ethnic Albanian nun who worked among the destitute in Kolkata and founded a missionary order that eventually spread to more than 130 countries. When she died in 1997, her labour among the “poorest of the poor” was saluted by the leaders of India and Pakistan, who were neither Christian nor in agreement about much else. She had her critics, some of whom branded her indifferent to the root causes of poverty, and opposed to the female empowerment which might have improved living standards. Some felt that she was too quick to seek the approval of the rich and powerful. But people respected her manifest indifference to her own material comfort. As one more example of holy, disinterested eccentricity, take the figure of Maria Skobtsova, the cigarette-smoking Russian nun who lived among the down-and-out in Paris in the 1930s and was eventually executed in a Nazi gas chamber in 1945. Practising the ideal of unconditional hospitality, she was critical of the ritualistic piety of some fellow members of the Russian diaspora in France, and she doubtless infuriated some of them. But she was the one who was eventually recognised as a martyr, not her pious compatriots. What all these people have in common is the fact that they embraced uncomfortable lives, even though they had experienced a relatively comfortable existence and might have held onto it. Dorothy Day was the daughter of secular middle-class Americans, her father a sports writer. Mother Teresa could have practised her monastic vocation in Ireland, a land where she lived as a young woman. Skobstova was a talented poet and well-trained intellectual who could certainly have enjoyed the secular side of life as a Russian émigré. The reputation of a “saint”, whether in the strict sense or a somewhat broader one, is a fickle thing. The spectacle of self-abnegation in a higher cause is both fascinating and to some observers, a bit suspicious. Presented with any paragon of virtue, people immediately start asking themselves what flaws this altruistic individual had, and if the flaws turn out to be rather glaring, that can come as a kind of relief. But when facing public scrutiny, mitred princes of the church are at a particular disadvantage. They must convince sceptical onlookers that the trappings of power and prestige which they  enjoy by virtue of their office are being worn with humility, and in a spirit of concern for others. (If they have personal experience of persecution, as John Paul II did under Nazism and communism, that certainly adds credibility.) But in general, today’s world, both religious and otherwise, prefers a mud-caked eccentric to a gorgeous episcopal robe.