EARLY IN the first episode of “When They See Us”, a detective responding to the news that a jogger has been found beaten and raped at 11pm in New York’s Central Park asks: “What was she doing there?” The line captures the assumptions that governed white New Yorkers’ behaviour in April 1989, when the city’s murder rate was seven times higher than it is now, and sensible folk did not venture into the park after dark. By the time the viewer hears that line, they know that Ava DuVernay, who directed the four-part Netflix series, intends to take this story as it was told by the city’s media at the time, and turn it inside out. She starts not with the jogger in the park, but earlier that afternoon, with the boys who will be wrongfully convicted—strolling through Harlem with their families, joking about baseball and school. Viewers see their innocence first, so that they can watch the machinery of a racist justice system destroy it.  Films based on true stories often exaggerate the contemporary notoriety of events for dramatic effect. In the Central Park jogger case this is unnecessary: it dominated New York’s public consciousness. With the victim, an investment banker, in an unresponsive coma, police launched a dragnet across Harlem. The press was filled with lurid accounts of “wilding”, described as a Harlem fad in which adolescent boys roamed the park in packs, seeking targets. The city was about to get its first black mayor, crime and the crack epidemic were at their peaks, and the feminist “Take Back the Night” movement was demanding harsher prosecution of sexual assault. The case was overseen by a flamboyant, press-hungry assistant district attorney, Linda Fairstein (played by Felicity Huffman). Ultimately four black and one Latino boy between the ages of 14 and 16 were convicted of committing the attack together. But there was no physical evidence, the boys’ confessions were inconsistent and black protesters called it a stitch-up. They were right. In 2002 Matias Reyes, a serial rapist serving a life sentence, confessed to the crime, and the convictions were voided. Ms DuVernay’s series is a powerful counterpoint to “The Central Park Five”, the documentary released in 2012 by Ken and Sarah Burns. The documentary enjoys an advantage: it can simply raise questions about crucial issues such as what the police did to coerce confessions, or whether the boys were involved in other crimes that night (including attacks on cyclists and another jogger). Ms DuVernay must pick a version, and she sides firmly with the boys. They are depicted as innocents, caught up in an after-dark romp, who had the bad luck to get arrested. The police coach the boys to invent their confessions and beat them when they hesitate. This loyalty to the protagonists is both the strength and the weakness of the series. It allows the film-makers to depict the boys’ family and community lives with tremendous empathy and sophistication. Antron McCray’s relationship with his ex-convict father (portrayed by Michael Kenneth Williams, who played Omar in “The Wire”) is a heartbreaking mix of love and resentment. In prison, Yusef Salaam forms religious bonds with other Muslim prisoners, while the baby-faced Kevin Richardson struggles for guidance. But the commitment to the Five’s perspective leaves the film with unconvincing, cardboard-thin characterisations of its villains: the police and prosecutors. Ms Fairstein’s careerist zeal is never quite sufficient to explain her malevolence. The series is also dead set on eventually granting the Five redemption. This leaves it strangely reluctant to probe the permanent damage their incarceration wrought. It edges in that direction in the final episode, which focuses on Korey Wise, who (unlike the other four) was 16 at the time of his arrest and thus committed to the adult rather than the juvenile system. Ms DuVernay shows how Mr Wise’s isolation and beatings at the hands of other inmates drove him to the edge of madness. But once the real rapist confesses to the crime, Mr Wise is depicted as having overcome adversity. In fact, many who know Mr Wise describe him as wracked by post-traumatic stress, unable to escape his ruined adolescence. Appropriately, the series repeatedly cuts in historical footage of Donald Trump, then a billionaire celebrity with political ambitions, who helped whip up hysteria against the Central Park Five and took out a full-page newspaper advertisement calling for them to receive the death penalty. But that is just one way in which the case echoes into the present. For a viewer who was living in the city during Mr Wise’s trial, the horror of watching “When They See Us” is the intimation that America has transcended none of its history of racist injustice. “When They See Us” is available on Netflix from May 31st