AT THE back of the Pitt Rivers Museum in Oxford, beyond the Mexican caricature masks and Siberian underwear made from reindeer hide, is a small room with a big show. The first thing you see at the entrance is a hand-stencilled sign that says: “Welcome to the Jungle  Pop. 8143 Children 1496 Unaccompanied 1291” The “Jungle” here is the Calais Jungle, an encampment for migrants and refugees who, having crossed from Africa and the Middle East, eked out an existence outside the city in northern France while they waited for passage to Britain. The official version is that the camp was in use between January 2015 and October 2016, after which 6,400 migrants were removed in 170 buses, with the aim, according to Le Monde, of resettling them in different parts of France. On October 26th 2016 the French interior ministry announced that the Calais “Jungle” had been taken apart. As a counterpoint to this narrative, Dan Hicks, a professor of archaeology at Oxford University, and a French colleague, Sarah Mallet, set about telling a different, and ongoing, story. Through drawings, photographs, objects and audio recordings—most of them borrowed from volunteers who worked in the camp—they have turned a political irritation into a powerful human drama about cruelty and kindness. The book that accompanies the show describes in detail how the authorities on both sides of the Channel helped create the beginnings of what Theresa May, when she was home secretary, described as “a really hostile environment for illegal migrants”. Residents of the “Jungle” are treated to “an endless guerrilla siege”, walled in by concrete and barbed wire, their tents cut open with blades and sprayed with teargas and then burned. What might, in other hands, have been voyeurism or a piece of poverty tourism turns out to be anything but. The Pitt Rivers opened in 1884, the same year as the Berlin Conference that partitioned Africa. Like other anthropology museums of the time, it subscribed to the vogue for placing human beings across the world in various categories of  “us” and “them”, with Europeans sitting at the top of a supposed human hierarchy. Conscious of this history—“our national borders and anthropology museums are both Victorian technologies of classification,” the exhibition notes say; “they were designed to forge differences between people”—the curators have chosen to highlight the drama and boredom of everyday life in a migrant camp. The “Jungle” landscapes of Calais began to emerge not in January 2015 but as far back as the 1990s, the curators say. They are still there. The official government line, in Britain as well as France, may well be that the area has been cleared. But a brief email (printed out and pinned up at the end of the exhibition), which an agency called Help Refugees sends the curators every month, says that on May 2nd this year there were “1,000 displaced people living between Calais and Dunkirk, over 280 of which are unaccompanied children. This number of children has doubled in two months.” Migrants fleeing poverty and war is one of Europe’s biggest political challenges. As this exhibition shows, how Europeans decide to treat them is a profound moral test, too. “Lande: The Calais ‘Jungle’ and Beyond” is at the Pitt Rivers Museum, Oxford, until November 29th. Read more: A thoughtful dramatisation of life in the Calais “Jungle”