The Last Job: The “Bad Grandpas” and the Hatton Garden Heist. By Dan Bilefsky. W.W. Norton; 304 pages; $26.95. THE TEN-TONNE, bomb-proof door of the Hatton Garden Safe Deposit Company has never been breached. But over the long Easter weekend of 2015, an ingenious gang found another way into the closely guarded vault beneath London’s jewellery quarter. After sneaking into the building, the robbers climbed down a lift-shaft, disabled an alarm system and drilled through 20inches (51cm) of reinforced concrete, before worming their way through the hole to ransack the safe. They made off with wheelie-bins full of gold, cash and gems worth more than $20m.  The Hatton Garden burglary was “the last great British heist”, in the words of the prosecutor who eventually convicted the men behind it. It was also one of the oddest, as Dan Bilefsky, a correspondent for the New York Times, explains in his entertaining and detailed account of the caper. The fearsome crew behind the crime of the century turned out to be a gang of grandpas, led by a 76-year-old who travelled to the raid using his senior citizen’s bus pass. The “diamond wheezers”, as the Sun newspaper nicknamed them, overcame diabetes, heart disease and incontinence to carry out a spectacular last job. The story provides a rich slice of London’s East End underworld, with a cast including men with names such as “Little Legs” Larkins, Billy the Fish and Jimmy Two Baths. One of the other crooks depicted in the book has a pair of Rottweilers called Brinks and Mat (after the Brink’s-Mat robbery, another celebrated hold-up); another once kept a pet lion and has a door-bell that plays the theme from “Goldfinger”. Some aspects of the Hatton Garden story sound straight from the script of a Michael Caine film—and indeed, three years after the event, it became one (see picture). Scotland Yard initially made a hash of the case. The grandpas tripped an alarm as they broke in, but the police failed to respond. In the aftermath of the crime, tips pointed to an eastern European gang called the Pink Panthers. But soon the Flying Squad homed in on the grandpas, largely thanks to John “Kenny” Collins, described by fellow gang-members as a “wombat-thick old cunt”, who drove to the crime in his own distinctively painted Mercedes. Police tracked it on CCTV and were led to other members of the crew. By bugging their cars, they pieced the crime together (a task complicated by the elderly crooks’ habit of having the radio on very loud, and by their use of obscure Cockney slang). The grandpas were “1980s criminals who committed a crime in the 21st century”, as one of their defence lawyers put it. They used the same mobile phones after the robbery, forgot to throw away their public-transport smart-cards, and boasted about the crime in their bugged cars and in their favourite pub (which was Mr Bilefsky’s local too, as it happens), where the police were filming them and passing the footage to a lip-reader. Eventually the cops swooped, catching the men red-handed with Lidl bags full of loot. “It’s overwhelming I suppose, innit?” conceded one of the gang when police confronted him with the evidence. It was: the grandpas pleaded guilty and were sent to a high-security prison, some of them straining with their hearing aids to hear the judge’s sentence.