LEAKS IN WESTMINSTER are common. Leaks from meetings of the National Security Council (NSC), which include cabinet ministers, generals and an array of spooks, are not. When details of Theresa May’s decision to allow Huawei, a Chinese telecoms group, to build next-generation infrastructure in Britain appeared in the Daily Telegraph on April 24th, an inquiry was duly launched. It took barely a week to find its man. The supposed mole? Gavin Williamson, the defence secretary. Despite swearing his innocence (“on my children’s lives”), Mr Williamson was sacked by Mrs May on May 1st. Her letter to him was brutal. There was “compelling” evidence that he had leaked details of the meeting. No other “credible” story existed. Mr Williamson has been replaced by Penny Mordaunt, previously secretary for international development, who also attended the fateful meeting but managed to keep her mouth shut. She in turn is replaced by the ambitious Rory Stewart.  Mrs May has now lost ten cabinet members in less than three years in office. Mr Williamson was liked by defence chiefs for winning more money for his department, but became a tabloid figure of fun after squeaking that Russia should “go away and shut up”. As a former chief whip he gave the prime minister valuable insight into the unhappy mood of the party. Yet when the inquiry fingered him, Mrs May wasted no time. She has not revealed the evidence against him and calls the matter “closed”. But opposition parties are calling for a criminal investigation; Mr Williamson himself says the police would clear him. The subject matter of the leak was sensitive. America has for months been lobbying its allies to freeze Huawei out of their 5G telecoms networks, arguing that China could use the firm’s gear for spying or sabotage. It has had only mixed success. Australia banned Huawei outright. New Zealand turned down a request from a local firm to use Huawei’s gear. But Germany has pushed back, as has the European Union. Britain’s decision to give Huawei a limited role makes it the most prominent refusenik. Its signals-intelligence agency, GCHQ, works hand-in-glove with its American counterpart, the National Security Agency. America has said it may cut back intelligence-sharing with countries that ignore its warnings. That is probably bluster: if nothing else, Britain’s geographical location makes it too useful to simply abandon (many transatlantic internet cables come ashore in Britain). Instead, the Americans may hope that by keeping up the pressure they may persuade a future government to reverse the decision. The NSC was split on whether to allow Huawei in. Mrs May ignored its more hawkish members and gave the green light. But she is unlikely to be prime minister for much longer. Several likely candidates for her job, including Ms Mordaunt, Jeremy Hunt, the foreign secretary, and Sajid Javid, the home secretary, were among those who voted no—as did Mr Williamson. Unlike the rest of this small cast, Mr Williamson now has little chance of having another say.