THE SCALE of what is needed to stave off the worst impacts of climate change is often compared to a war effort. On May 2nd an official advisory panel drew up Britain’s battleplan. The Committee on Climate Change (CCC) said that Britain should aim to eliminate net emissions of greenhouse gases by 2050. If achieved, this would mark the end of Britain’s contribution to global warming, notwithstanding “exported” emissions resulting from products made abroad. The government is considering the report; experts think it likely to adopt its recommendations. Members of Extinction Rebellion, a group that has staged protests around London in recent weeks, will be dismayed; they have called for emissions to end by 2025. But science and common sense alike suggest that is virtually impossible. In fact, the CCC’s target is one of the most ambitious in the world.  First, it does not include international “credits”, whereby a country eliminates most but not all emissions and offsets the rest, for instance by subsidising green power in poor countries. Norway and Sweden already have net-zero targets, for 2030 and 2045 respectively, but both allow for offsets. This is convenient nationally, but incompatible with global decarbonisation. Second, the CCC recommended that Britain should stop emissions of all greenhouse gases, not just carbon dioxide. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, a UN body, has found that to have a higher than 50% chance of avoiding more than 1.5°C of global warming, worldwide emissions of CO2 alone must come down to zero by mid-century, and all emissions must cease by 2070. Third, the target includes Britain’s share of international aviation and shipping, which are frequently left out of such accounting. Aviation, in particular, may make up only around 2% of emissions worldwide, but it is a growing industry with few affordable low-carbon alternatives. France is the only other country to have proposed a net-zero target that includes aviation and shipping. (The French target, like the British one, has yet to be written into law.) The CCC insists that its target is achievable using existing technologies. That does not mean it will be easy. Under Britain’s Climate Change Act of 2008, emissions are supposed to fall 80% below their 1990 levels by 2050, leaving room for some sectors to under-achieve. Net-zero allows no such wriggle room. The CCC calls for a massive boost in electricity supply to phase out fossil-fuel use, particularly in transport and domestic heating. All cars would need to be electric well before 2040, the date the government has pencilled in. Gas boilers would have to be replaced with electric heating or heat pumps (which draw warmth from the air or the ground and pump it into buildings). The public would need to eat 20% less beef, lamb and dairy products. The list goes on. In all, says the CCC, these and other measures could cut emissions by 95% by 2050, with the remainder soaked up by a vast tree-planting programme and a new industry to capture CO2 and store it underground or beneath the North Sea. These are big asks. Heat pumps, hydrogen and carbon-capture—existing technologies that need investment and trials in order to be scaled up—have received little attention. “It is not credible to set this target unless there is a very significant change in the policies to deliver it,” says Chris Stark, the CCC’s chief executive. Working in the target’s favour is the falling cost of technology. In 2008 the CCC estimated that lowering emissions by 80% by 2050 would cost 1-2% of GDP annually by then. Unforeseen drops in the cost of renewable energy and batteries, among other things, mean the committee now says net-zero can be achieved for the same price. “This is not about what we hope or we think ought to happen, it’s about what can happen,” said Lord Debden, the CCC’s chairman, at the report’s launch. “We can do it, and therefore if we don’t it’s because we have chosen not to.”