AT THE END of the Grande Halle de la Villette, a former abattoir built by Emperor Napoleon III in the north-east of Paris, lay “Yam Dreaming” (pictured above), a work by six men from Yuendumu, a community of Aboriginal artists in central Australia. A teeming rectangular floor installation, it was ten metres long and made from earth, ochre, paint and crushed herbs. On the wall behind it was “Red Earth Circle” by Richard Long, a British artist, which used mud scooped from the River Avon, near his birthplace. The circles and spirals on the floor and Mr Long’s shape clearly shared a connection; you could see it in how people stood and stared from one to the other. Perhaps the adjacent works pointed in the same direction; perhaps they were aspects of the same idea. Such questions delighted Jean-Hubert Martin, the curator who had brought the two pieces together. They were just the sort of responses he wanted to “Magiciens de la Terre” (“Magicians of the Earth”), a groundbreaking show he put on in Paris in 1989. The exhibition was in some ways a flop. In others it was a harbinger, or catalyst, of the way the art world would change with globalisation in the next three decades—changes evident at the Venice Biennale, contemporary art’s premier showcase, which begins on May 11th and where work by artists from 90 countries will be shown. As Frances Morris, now director of Tate Modern in London, wryly remarks: “It was the most famous exhibition nobody saw.”  Born in Alsace in 1944, Mr Martin grew up at a time when the notion that great art meant Western art was a given—at least in the West. Then, aged 21, a history-of-art student and a hippy, he headed overland to India in a Citroen 2CV and found himself wondering why, despite centuries of exposure to, and appropriation from, other cultures, the art world still paid attention to only European and American work. That puzzlement came to a head in 1984. Having become director of Kunsthalle Bern in Switzerland, Mr Martin travelled to New York to see the latest show at the Museum of Modern Art (MoMA), which focused on the moment European and American artists saw art from sub-Saharan Africa for the first time. African masks, their makers unknown, sat beside proto-Cubist pieces by Picasso—not as creations in their own right but as illustrations meant to demonstrate how a “real” artist absorbed such influences. Mr Martin resolved to do better. Partly as a reaction to the MoMA show, he came up with the idea of “Magiciens de la Terre”. It would present the work of 100 living artists, half from the West and half from the rest of the world. They would meet on equal terms, and thus, he hoped, reveal a universal spirit of creativity. He pitched the idea to the directors of Documenta, a monumental contemporary-art exhibition that has been put on in the German city of Kassel every five years since 1955. They turned it down. It was the first in a long series of rejections from people he approached for money, a venue or both. When he finally got lucky it was partly through the misfortune of others. After he moved from Bern to Paris to be director of the Pompidou Centre, also known as the Beaubourg, the Biennale de Paris was suspended, making its venue at La Villette available. Canal Plus, a French broadcaster, joined as a sponsor. Mr Martin was thus able to stage the show across the two venues, part of it downtown at the Beaubourg, part of it out at La Villette. It opened 30 years ago this month. The timing was auspicious. The cold war and its proxy struggles were ending, while the bicentenary of the French revolution provided a context of equality and fraternity—and of a world turned upside down. The artists, many of whom had never exhibited outside their own country, were presented with no explanation of how they fitted into either group—Westerners or the rest—how famous they were, what prizes they had won or which art school, if any, they had attended. Besides telling visitors the artists’ names and countries of origin, the exhibition offered no comment, comparison or context: all that was left to the viewers. Film, collages and installations were mixed up with masks, earthworks and embroidery, as well as the more conventional art forms, sculpture and painting. Two lines of brightly coloured giant funerary statues (pictured right), by Sunday Jack Akpan from Nigeria, formed a guard of honour next to a wall of pink quartz cubes which Marina Abramovic, a Serbian performance artist, had placed at the height of her head, her heart, her sex. Some of Mr Martin’s peers were scathing, he recalls. Kasper König, founding director of Skulptur Projekte Münster and one of the great curators of his generation, brushed the show aside as “UNESCO art”—pro forma internationalism driven by insipid politics. Few institutions were moved to acquire any of the non-Western pieces. The professionals’ lack of interest was matched by the public’s. When the show closed on August 14th fewer than 300,000 people had seen it, piddling by the Pompidou’s normal standards. The catalogue was never translated from French. Now that catalogue is prized: a copy will cost you €420 ($470) on eBay. The show it commemorates is remembered as one that reshaped the art world—and which remains controversial a generation later. These days, the two words most often used to describe “Magiciens de la Terre” are “important” and “troubling”. Its influence can be observed wherever you see contemporary art from beyond America, Europe and Japan—which means, now, wherever you see contemporary art. Take the fact that contemporary-art biennales flicker on and off around the planet like fireflies on a summer night, fed by dealers and collectors in places where such people were not known before. Or consider that a Congolese sculptor first seen outside his homeland at “Magiciens”, the late Bodys Isek Kingelez, was recently the subject of a show at MoMA; or that works by Romuald Hazoumè, a sculptor from Benin who makes masks out of bits of rubbish, are shown at Gagosian, the trendiest set of commercial galleries in the world. You can also see the show’s influence, if you have access, in private collections—including some it inspired. Jean Pigozzi, heir to a French motor fortune, visited on the last afternoon before it closed. The next week he set about building a collection of African contemporary art, supporting artists with brushes, paints and cash for decades. “‘Magiciens’ was extremely important in my life,” he says. What then of the controversy? Start with the name. By calling his artists “Magiciens”, thus invoking a vague sense of voodoo or black magic, Mr Martin showed a taste for the exotic that post-colonial academia was trying hard to dispel. The name also suggested that the art was somehow conjured up, rather than the result of an intelligence at work. “The message was that it’s not real, what they do,” says Glenn Lowry, MoMA’s director. “It’s magic.” Some wondered how far Mr Martin’s apparent inclusiveness really went. Many of the Western artists were already unconstrained by borders, taking an interest in the global (as in Alighiero Boetti’s embroidered world maps) and the universal (as in the explorations of the subconscious given form in the sculpture of Louise Bourgeois). Yet he was not particularly interested in developing-country artists who explored the developed world and its ideas, says Lucy Steeds, an art historian who has written extensively about the show. Indeed, Mr Martin avoided non-Western artists who were actively engaging with modernism, seeing them as derivative, even contaminated, by the influence of Europeans. It was a bias which led him to ignore great artists from Japan, Latin America and north Africa. One who made the cut, Rasheed Araeen, a Pakistani long resident in Britain, has never let that involvement stop him criticising the project harshly. Simply displaying work by artists from all over the world, he says, was never going to undermine the Western-dominated status quo. Mr Martin’s desire that non-Western art should be “authentic” led him to traditional Aboriginal earth paintings, to the coloured face masks carved by Dossou Amidou from Benin and the multi-headed cast-iron sculptures made by Georges Liautaud, a 90-year-old Haitian. For advice, he turned not to art galleries or curators, but to French anthropologists who had worked in west Africa, Asia or the Caribbean. Yet the stripped-down format of his show often undercut the authenticity he claimed to prize. A work like “Yam Dreaming” is rooted in a spiritual dimension that is specific to the culture of the people who made it. Seen by people ignorant of that culture and in an alien environment, it is robbed of some of its essence. The same cannot be said of Mr Long’s “Red Earth Circle”, which was much more on its home turf. Centred on the wall at the end of a high-ceilinged hall, it could not help but recall, for a Western audience, the rose window of a cathedral. The minimal labelling compounded the problem. To add nothing to the name of an established Western artist such as Mr Long—who, having been nominated for the Turner prize in three previous years, was about to win it—was efficiently minimalist. Doing the same for unknowns seemed a denial for artists and viewers alike. In an unequal world art cannot meet on fully equal terms. Memory, history and association add to a piece’s power. So does scholarship: an appreciation of how this work, made here and now, relates to that work there and then. You cannot wish away those depths—but nor should the art world be divided into siloed provinces and ghettoes. Despite its flaws and the assumptions of its time, “Magiciens” helped sweep away many old barriers. And it posed an always relevant, always vexed question: Who decides what is great art? The bold way in which it presented its artworks together, yet in isolation, continues to be debated 30 years on. Ms Morris, the Tate director, summarises the challenge it embodied: “Once you deconstruct the canon, what do you put in its place?” Images: © mnam-cci Bibliothèque Kandinsky, Dist. rmn-gps 