NATURE DOCUMENTARIES are enjoying a moment in the sun. While politicians around the world have failed to pass much meaningful legislation on climate change, film-makers have captured melting ice caps, coral bleaching and devastating floods. On May 9th Netflix announced that “Our Planet”, a mini-series examining humanity’s impact on different species and habitats, was the most-watched title on the streaming site in Britain in April. These productions combine sumptuous cinematography, engaging animal narratives and policy recommendations, demonstrating how an individual’s behaviour can have wide-ranging repercussions. After “Blue Planet II” showed birds feeding their chicks debris from the ocean, an estimated 88% of viewers changed their consumption of single-use plastic. “The Biggest Little Farm”, a new documentary, looks at the challenge of sustainability from a much more intimate perspective. There are no playful orangutans or majestic sea turtles; instead it chronicles the journey of two urban-dwellers as they try to reintroduce biodiversity to an abandoned farm. By keeping its focus on practical issues and the realities of running a smallholding, the film offers a feel-good story of environmental recovery that, while sometimes overly simplistic, encourages viewers to reflect on the small changes they might make in their own lives.  John and Molly Chester start out as an average pair of health-conscious Angelenos. John is a wildlife cinematographer, while Molly is a chef with grand ideas about proper farming techniques but little experience of agricultural work. After being evicted from their home on short notice, they decide to put their passions to work and buy a farm. There they encounter soil that has been ruined by years of monoculture, so they hire a guide—Alan York, a “renowned expert in traditional farming practices”—to teach them how to cultivate more than 200 crops and feed a range of animals that will “self-regulate”. The idea is to create a system that will feed the soil and the people equally, and the Chesters approach this challenge with idealism. Yet they soon encounter problems, and persistent ones. Pests, ranging from snails to coyotes, move in immediately; natural forces such as droughts, floods and wildfires—all of which have been exacerbated by climate change—mount a considerable threat to their project. “The Biggest Little Farm” depicts a relationship with the natural world that is by turns both life-affirming and horribly grim. The coyotes prove a constant menace, and John’s efforts to stymie them become the central narrative of the film. Images of ravaged chickens recur. But there are also moments of exquisite cinematography, filmed by Mr Chester himself, who also directs. He focuses his lens on the most miniscule of creatures, from ladybugs to dung beetles. When an animal that lives in manure gets a moment in the spotlight, it reflects the idea that, on a truly biodiverse farm, every player matters. Mr Chester resists the temptation to anthropomorphise these creatures, instead demonstrating the key role each plays. These shifts in tone represent the endless cycles of life and death, of frustration and success, that come with a working farm. It is not the most dramatic narrative: at points the cycles become predictable, even while the film heads towards its happy ending. And though “The Biggest Little Farm” pointedly leaves out some of the most brutal elements of farming—the film asks the viewer to mourn for those animals killed by predators, but makes little reference to what awaits the animals raised for meat—it is likely to succeed in encouraging its audience to act. Few will be able to copy the Chesters’ actions directly, but watching two ordinary people take initiative, face setbacks and overcome challenges in the name of a better world is inspiring enough. After witnessing the couple radically re-organise their priorities and risk their own livelihood, small sacrifices such as growing vegetables, eating less meat, avoiding plastic or taking public transportation more often may seem less daunting. It is a thoughtfully narrow approach, and a valuable addition to a thriving genre. “The Biggest Little Farm” is released in America on May 10th