ANNE LISTER turns up in Halifax in 1832 with all the swaggering elan of a cowboy riding into town. Dressed in black—including a great-coat and a top hat—she bosses around her father and sister, faces off with the neighbours, reminisces about her female lovers, extracts rent from tenants, commandeers a stagecoach and shoots a horse. It is clear from the first episode of “Gentleman Jack” that Lister (Suranne Jones) is a singular individual. The series—a joint venture by HBO and the BBC—tells an unlikely true story. Lister defied the customs of her time as a landowner (she inherited Shibden Hall, in West Yorkshire, from her uncle in 1836, but ran the estate long before that), mountaineer and traveller. Something of a polymath, she studied surgery in Paris under George Cuvier and helped build coal pits. Lister is also considered by some to be the “first modern lesbian”, taking a local heiress named Ann Walker as her common-law wife.  In a further gift to dramatists, Lister was also an obsessive diarist, recording the minutiae of her life in more than 4m words. Large sections, mostly concerning her love affairs with women, were written in a “crypt” of her own devising, which combined mathematical symbols, punctuation and the Greek alphabet. The code was not fully cracked until more than a century after her death, and the diaries have been a source of fascination ever since. Sally Wainwright, who wrote and directed “Gentleman Jack”, worked with Anne Choma, a historian, to transcribe new passages to better inform the show’s plot. The series spans the 18-month period in which Lister seduces Walker, whose fortune she believes will help prop up her ailing estate. “Gentleman Jack” is brighter and more engaging than most period dramas. Filmed in and around the real Shibden Hall, the show gives a true sense of time and place, from the glamour of country estates to the grim reality of local mines. Ms Jones brings a steely determination to her character that is compelling to watch. Sophie Rundle offers a suitable contrast as Walker, at turns spoilt, frustratingly fragile and desperate for affection. The actresses’ shared scenes are dynamic, showing how the balance of power between two people can shift from moment to moment, and how inequality, be it in desire, wealth, status or self-confidence, allows for manipulation. Their interactions are intelligent and frequently funny. Scenes depicting physical intimacy between the two women—too often an opportunity for gratuitous nudity or pornified raunchiness—are handled deftly here. In a first for a BBC production, Ms Wainwright hired an “intimacy coordinator” to choreograph them, and it shows. The sex scenes seem realistic, providing depth and feeling to the storyline rather than mere shock value. Yet “Gentleman Jack” strives too hard to make its central character likeable. Lister’s diaries reveal her to be a complicated, often unpleasant, woman, yet in the show these traits are toned down. Many of her worst qualities are mitigated: her snobbery and cruelty towards the working class is reduced to a brief argument about the 1832 Reform Act that expanded male suffrage; her disdainful manipulation of Walker for financial gain is sanitised with romantic feelings it is unclear the real Lister ever felt; her selfishness is portrayed as an admirable attempt to live entirely on her own terms. “Gentleman Jack” also skirts around the nuances of gender and sexuality in the period, one caught between the leniency of the Georgian period and the relative prudishness of the Victorians. Unlike male homosexuality, lesbianism was not criminalised but rather ignored. Intense “romantic friendships” among women were relatively common, and there are several examples of longstanding, public lesbian partnerships before Lister’s and Walker’s. Indeed, Lister was perceived as unusual mostly because she conducted business like a man (“Gentleman Jack” was considered an insulting nickname). Opposition to her union with Walker was chiefly driven by fears of money-grabbing rather than sexual bigotry. The series, with eight hour-long episodes, would have had ample room to examine such details—particularly if it had lost the somewhat tiresome subplots involving peripheral characters, unlikely murders and coach accidents. “Gentleman Jack” is advertised as a show about the first “modern lesbian”, yet it does not trust its audience to be modern enough to grasp historical nuances or accept a challenging female lead.