IT IS A bit like covering the world’s most powerful financial institutions without ever setting foot in New York. For eight years I have written about the technology industry from London—first as an intern at The Economist, then as a tech correspondent at Quartz and eventually, in my spare time, as news editor back at The Economist. Yet I did so without ever having visited Silicon Valley, the stretch of land between San Francisco and San Jose that forms the spiritual and economic home of all things tech. In part, this was made possible by the industry’s very nature: distributed, connected and mobile. It is possible to interview Satya Nadella in Paris, pose questions to Eric Schmidt in New Delhi and listen to Mark Zuckerberg in Barcelona. New giants emerge from Beijing, unlikely business models from Mumbai and startups from Nairobi. But Silicon Valley has long been the star around which everything else revolves.  Yet to visit it for the first time is to be disappointed. As Gertrude Stein once said of Oakland, just across the bay from San Francisco, “there is no there there”. There is no big white lettering, as in Hollywood, or sign, as on Wall Street, that you have arrived. First-time visitors sometimes ask where exactly Silicon Valley is, even when they are in it. These observations are not particularly original, but they are crucial to understanding not just Silicon Valley but also the digital world inhabited by most of us, at least outside the firewalled garden of China. Unlike the great cities of America—New York, Chicago, even flat, suburban Los Angeles—contemporary San Francisco is defined by its enormous hinterland, known as the Bay Area. In most cities, people live in suburbs and commute in to the centre. Finance is headquartered in the streets of downtown Manhattan; Hollywood studios are still in dense neighbourhoods (at least by American standards). In the Bay Area, though, many young tech workers live in the city and commute out. Every day dozens of plush, Wi-Fi-enabled buses ferry workers out to the Valley. It is 40 miles (or 64km) from downtown San Francisco to Mountain View, where Google is headquartered, roughly the same distance as from central London to Reading, or from midtown Manhattan to Edison, New Jersey. Those who cannot bear this commute—generally workers with children—live out in the Valley itself, a bleak, featureless sprawl of American exurbia. It is all office parks, strip malls, single-family homes and highways. Anybody looking for a “there” will be disappointed. After finally seeing the Valley for myself, so many things about the technology it spawns now make sense. For years I wondered why every new product or feature peddled in the annual PR galas put on by Google or Apple involved restaurant recommendations. Coming from India, where a place to eat can be found by sauntering down the road, and having lived for the past decade in Europe, where public transport is efficient and finding nourishment often serendipitous, the American obsession with recommendations, whether for food, shops or services, was baffling. Until, that is, you realise that the people creating these products spend their lives moving around at 60mph in giant tins of fibreglass and plastic. It is not possible to stumble upon a café when you are driving down a six-lane highway. You need to know where you are going to go. Which brings me to driverless cars. The notion of autonomous vehicles navigating the warren of London’s streets elicits only sympathy for those poor, permanently stationary vehicles. But in California, with its runway-like highways, wide lanes and go-kartesque automatic vehicles that practically drive themselves—to say nothing of its lousy to non-existent public transport—it all makes sense. The driverless car is an engineer’s natural reaction to the environment. Even the founding mythology of Silicon Valley—the idea that a bunch of guys (always guys) can start tinkering around in a garage and turn that into a world-eating megacorp—is one that makes little sense outside the Bay Area. Most New Yorkers live in apartments the size of a Silicon Valley garage. Most Londoners eschew cars and don’t have garages at all. You could house an extended family of eight Mumbaikars in the footprint of a Ford F-150 pick-up truck. (Though with rocketing property prices in the Valley, new garage-based startups are becoming increasingly rare.) If the geography of the Valley helps to explain the technology it has produced, however, it will matter less to the services it will provide in the future. Google, aware that its growth potential recommending restaurants to residents of Atlanta and Phoenix may have levelled off, has set up a “next billion unit” with the express purpose of figuring out how to make products for people in “Mumbai, not Mountain View”. And Apple, having run out of the world’s limited number of rich people to sell gadgets to, is now trying to fulfil a more universal desire: that for entertainment (in the form of remunerative subscriptions). Unlike running apps or driving directions, movies and music are something consumed by both rich and poor. After all, everybody likes watching stuff on their phones, regardless of whether they live in a four-bed in the East Bay or a 400-square-foot flat in Faridabad.