WHEN NOEL QUINN took over as interim chief executive of HSBC from John Flint, ousted by the board in August, analysts expected a change in style. In contrast to the outgoing boss, seen as a cerebral introvert, Mr Quinn comes across as forthcoming, verging on the blunt. On that front at least, HSBC’s announcement of its latest results, the first on his watch, did not disappoint. Although the lender’s Asian business “held up well in a challenging environment”, performance in other areas was “not acceptable,'' Mr Quinn said on October 28th. Third-quarter net profits, down by 24% on the same period last year, to $3bn, undershot pundits’ forecasts by 14%. Revenues fell by 3.2%, to $13.4bn, missing expectations by 3%. Return on tangible equity (ROTE), the bank’s chief measure of profitability, reached 6.4%, compared with analysts’ forecast of 9.5%. Investors agreed with Mr Quinn’s verdict: the bank’s shares dropped by 4.3% on the news in London, their biggest daily fall in over two-and-a-half years. They have lost about 11% of their value in the last six months.  HSBC’s woes can be blamed in part on cyclical factors. Low interest rates and a slowing global economy have put pressure on net margins.Tensions between America and China are constraining trade, and hence revenues (HSBC is the world’s largest provider of trade finance). Add to that business uncertainty in Brexit-hit Britain, as well as economic strains in fringe markets like Argentina and Turkey, and the bank has indeed not been short of problems. Yet that is hardly likely to reassure investors. Tom Rayner of Numis Securities, a broker, points out that although some of these trends may be reversed, others, such as Brexit and the trade wars, may linger. Interest rates may well fall further, hurting margins. Investors are not yet pricing in any impact from the protests in Hong Kong, where HSBC is the largest lender. That is too optimistic, says Fahed Kunwar, at Redburn, another broker. Moreover, credit quality is worsening across several regions. True to his reputation for frankness, Mr Quinn recognises this. On October 28th HSBC, which has $2.7trn in assets, said it would ditch its ROTE target of 11% for 2020, suggesting it did not expect much of a fillip in the near future. It also hinted at a radical overhaul. Mr Quinn spoke of accelerating plans to “remodel” the poorly performing businesses. The first prong of this effort will be a renewed drive to pare costs. In August the bank announced a plan to complete 4,700 redundancies by the end of this year. Reports suggests HSBC could seek to cut an additional 8,000 to 10,000 jobs from its total headcount of 238,000 (a spokesperson declined to confirm the number of jobs to go). Yet after years of cost-cutting, analysts are divided as to whether much more fat can be trimmed. Daniel Tabbush of Tabbush Report, an Asia-based research firm, says HSBC “is not particularly bloated.” The bank is also looking to divest from some businesses. It may partially exit some share-trading activities in Western markets, and wants to sell its French retail operations. But a hasty disposal of badly performing units, which also include its American wholesale arm, may force the bank to write down part of their value. So hopes must be vested in the second prong of HSBC’s grand reform—to move capital away from the dreariest businesses and towards “higher growth and return opportunities”. Here there seems to be plenty of scope. HSBC’s cost-to-income ratio is 104% in Europe, compared with 43% in Asia, where it generates nearly 90% of its profits. The bank makes only a quarter of its lending in Britain, yet the country generates 35% of its non-performing loans, says Mr Tabbush. Its $98bn of risk-weighted assets allocated to America produce only $527m in annual profit. The bank’s management has so far declined to provide any guidance as to where capital might be reallocated to. HSBC is already heavily exposed to Asia, being the largest corporate lender to the region by market penetration, according to Greenwich Associates, a research firm. Getting more deeply into China may prove tricky, at least in the short-term. In August HSBC was left out of a list of banks helping Beijing set a new interest-rate benchmark, even as smaller rivals were invited to participate. That suggests the Chinese regulator may be giving the bank the cold shoulder over its role in assisting an American investigation into a key executive at Huawei, a Chinese telecoms firm, who has been arrested in Canada. Other dynamic markets, like Vietnam and Indonesia, are tiny by comparison. There are also limits to how much HSBC can rejig its various lines of business. Its strength in trade finance has so far failed to translate into clout in investment banking. Global capital markets are more lucrative, but volatile. In 2018 HSBC launched a new motto, “Together We Thrive,” read on countless posters by every passenger at London’s Heathrow airport. HSBC’s difficulties suggest its problem may have more to do with the flaws of this grand ambition than with external forces. By trying to do too much for too many people in too many places, the bank ends up seeing its returns irredeemably diluted. Yet even for its candid interim boss, that analysis may be rather too blunt.