THIS YEAR’S Nobel prize for physics was split two ways, but both halves went for discoveries beyond Earth. One was for a finding that is, by astronomical standards, quite close by—a planet going around a star a mere 50 light-years distant. The other was for an overview of the entire universe. In October 1995 Michel Mayor and Didier Queloz, a pair of astronomers then working at the University of Geneva, presented a paper at a scientific conference in Florence. A few months earlier they had discovered a planet beyond the solar system. It was a gaseous ball roughly twice the size of Jupiter and was going around a star called 51 Pegasi, at a distance of about 8m kilometres—a twentieth of the distance from Earth to the sun. As a consequence of this proximity it orbited 51 Pegasi once every four terrestrial days and had surface temperature in excess of 1,000°C. The discovery was a puzzle for astronomers. Until then they had thought that such large, Jupiter-like planets could form only far away from their host stars.  That discovery of 51 Pegasi b, as this planet is now known, launched the field of exoplanet astronomy. To date, astronomers have found almost 4,000 other such planets—and the wide variety of sizes, orbits and compositions of these objects continues to surprise researchers, who have yet to come up with a comprehensive physical theory of how planetary systems form. Since planets do not shine by themselves, astronomers needed to develop special methods to find them. The one Dr Mayor and Dr Queloz used relies on a phenomenon called the Doppler effect. As a planet orbits its star, that star will also move slightly, as it is pulled around by the gravity of the planet. This will cause the frequency of the starlight arriving at Earth to oscillate (that is, the star will change colour slightly), in the same way that the frequency of an ambulance siren shifts as the vehicle passes by. Nowadays a second approach, which measures the dip in starlight as a planet passes across its disc, is more common. But the Doppler-shift method, as employed by Dr Mayor and Dr Queloz, is still used as well. The half-prize for the overview of the universe went to James Peebles of Princeton University, who has spent decades developing a theoretical framework to describe how the cosmos evolved from the Big Bang 13.7bn years ago to the state it finds itself in today. According to Sweden’s Royal Academy of Science, Dr Peebles was the person who, in the 1960s, shifted cosmology from speculation to a rigorous science. Until the first decades of the 20th century, astronomers had assumed the universe to be stationary and eternal. This was shown to be incorrect in the 1920s, with the discovery that all galaxies are moving away from each other. In other words, the universe is expanding. Rewind the clock and this means that, at the start of time, now called the Big Bang, the universe would have been incredibly small, hot and dense. Around 400,000 years after the Big Bang, it had expanded and cooled enough for light to travel through space unimpeded. Astronomers can detect the glow of that first light today but, because its wavelength has been stretched by 13bn years of the expansion of space, it manifests itself as a background of microwave radiation that fills the entire sky. This cosmic microwave background was discovered, by accident, in 1964 by radio astronomers, who used earlier theoretical work by Dr Peebles to explain their discovery. Dr Peebles also showed that tiny fluctuations in the temperature of the microwave background were crucial to understanding how matter would later clump together to form galaxies and galaxy clusters. Since the early 1990s, space-based observatories have built up increasingly precise portraits of the cosmic microwave background (pictured) and, true to Dr Peebles’s predictions, these show that temperature variations of just one hundred-thousandth of a degree map onto the observed distribution of matter and energy in the universe. Rewarding cosmic shifts in understanding might seem to be a normal day’s work for those who give out the Nobel prizes. But Martin Rees, Britain’s Astronomer Royal, sees something new in this year’s awards in physics. The award to Dr Peebles, he says, will be welcomed by the physics community as recognition of a lifetime of sustained contributions and insights by an acknowledged intellectual leader, rather than a one-off achievement. In the past, astronomers have been garlanded whenever they have also discovered new physics such as neutron stars, gravitational waves or vacuum energy. And by rewarding the discovery of the first exoplanet, Lord Rees says the Nobel committee has highlighted “astronomy as also the grandest of the environmental sciences”.