THERE IS A basic contradiction between the quest for liberty, democracy and governmental accountability on the part of many Hong Kong people, and Beijing’s imperative of maintaining sovereign control. The paradox of “one country, two systems” is that it encourages aspirations for “Western-style” liberal democracy while placing limits on achieving those hopes. The aspirations are nurtured by the rule of law, judicial independence, constitutional protection of human rights, free press and the vibrant civil society in Hong Kong. The limits are dictated by the nature of China’s political system and its ideology, and the nascent “Cold War” between China and America.  Until recently “one country, two systems”, as enshrined in the Sino-British Joint Declaration of 1984 and the Hong Kong Basic Law, was largely a success. Yet since June, Hong Kong has experienced civil unrest. Many people, particularly young people, are dissatisfied with the one country, two systems policy, do not trust either the Hong Kong government or the Chinese government, identify themselves as Hong Kongers rather than Chinese citizens, and even consider the People’s Republic of China and mainland Chinese to be an alien “other”. How did we get to this situation, and what does it portend for the future? On the surface, the trigger was a proposed law on extradition of criminal suspects. Protesters and their sympathisers worried that if the bill were passed, innocent Hong Kongers would be at risk of being framed or falsely accused and then extradited to mainland China to face trial. However Hong Kong’s chief executive, Carrie Lam, and her advisers sincerely believed that the bill was neither sinister nor oppressive, but a well-intentioned attempt to improve Hong Kong’s judicial cooperation with other jurisdictions, notably mainland China and Taiwan. The bill was introduced to plug a shortcoming in the law that prevented the extradition of suspects to Taiwan and the mainland. The bill would enable criminal cases to proceed smoothly across judicial systems, as they do between Hong Kong and Britain under existing law. Opponents of the bill described their protest movement as “anti-delivery to China” or fan song zhong (反送中) , which in Cantonese has the same pronunciation as “anti-sending to death”, because the Chinese character zhong or 中 (meaning China) has the same pronunciation as zhong or 終 (meaning “end of life” in the phrase song zhong). The term fan song zhong vividly captures the protesters’ view that extradition of any person from Hong Kong to mainland China effectively means the end of that person. Since June, protesters have put forward five principal demands. Although they argue that the government has only responded to one of the demands, this is not entirely accurate. The government has responded to all of them—just not always in the way that the protesters like. On the first and main demand, Mrs Lam promised on September 4th to withdraw the bill when the Legislative Council next meets. So the protests have achieved their initial purpose. On the second demand, for an independent investigation on how the police handled the protests, the existing Independent Police Complaints Council (IPCC) has appointed five overseas experts (from Britain, Canada, Australia and New Zealand) to assist in such a review. Admittedly, this falls short of the independent investigation that protesters call for, as the IPCC has no power to summon witnesses. On the third demand, to lift the label of “riot” on the protest of June 12th (the day originally scheduled for the second reading of the bill), Mrs Lam pointed out that her previous use of this term had “no legal effect” and that the Department of Justice would handle each case on the basis of evidence and the law. Her hope is that this should allay protesters’ concern that the charge of rioting would be used against them indiscriminately, though trust is in very short supply. The fourth demand is that all charges against protesters be dropped. Mrs Lam has called this unacceptable and contrary to the rule of law and the Basic Law. In this regard, it should be noted that the original demand to drop charges was put forward immediately after the “riot” on June 12th. Since then the scale and intensity of violent protests have escalated tremendously. There is now apparently no strong public support for a blanket amnesty of protesters. The final demand is the immediate introduction of universal suffrage. Mrs Lam has acknowledged that universal suffrage is indeed the ultimate aim of Hong Kong’s political development as stipulated by the Basic Law, but that this can only be achieved within the framework and procedures set up by the Basic Law. It is noteworthy that a political reform package for the election of the chief executive by universal suffrage was actually put forward by the Hong Kong government in 2015, but was rejected in the Legislative Council by the “pan-democrats”—a loose collection of politicians who call for greater democratisation. They argued it was not “genuine” universal suffrage because candidates in the election were to be nominated by a committee dominated by pro-Beijing figures, and screened for their loyalty. Taken together, the Hong Kong government seems to believe it has already done all it can to respond to the protesters’ demands, notably by withdrawing the extradition bill—so no further concessions can or will be made. This approach apparently has the support of the Chinese government, which considers the protests at least partly fuelled by foreign and local political forces hostile to China. The priority is to stop the rioting, and the Hong Kong police have the full support of the central government. Following violent protests on China’s National Day on October 1st, Mrs Lam invoked her power under the emergency regulations ordinance to make a law prohibiting mask-wearing by demonstrators, which has only added fuel to the fire. Having taken larger political concessions off the table, the Hong Kong government now faces the choice of imposing more emergency measures, or initiating more community dialogue. The latter would be more acceptable to the people of Hong Kong—and perhaps more effective. In particular, the dialogue can consider issues of police regulation and accountability, and the establishment of an independent commission of inquiry to study the underlying causes of the protests and allegations of misconduct. No one can know how long the unrest will last. Yet regardless of how it eventually subsides, the contradictions inherent in one country, two systems—worsened by political polarisation and the socio-economic problems of Hong Kong society—are doomed to plague the territory and its future. __________ Albert H.Y. Chen is the Cheng Chan Lan Yue Professor in Constitutional Law at the University of Hong Kong.