COULD IT be a ceasefire at last? After months of rising tension and threats of ever higher tariffs, American and Chinese negotiators agreed to a mini-truce on October 11th. In exchange for America holding off on a tariff increase planned for October 15th, the Chinese government offered to buy American agricultural products. China also pledged to do more to liberalise its financial services sector, tighten up its intellectual property rules and be more transparent with its interventions in currency markets. President Donald Trump described the talks as “a love fest”. The details of the agreement are still unclear. Chinese state media did not even describe it as a deal, instead saying that substantial progress had been made in talks. Still, a ceasefire is better than higher tariffs and it might produce real gains. More transparency for China’s opaque currency regime, for example, would not hurt. The same day, in state-run media, China announced a timetable for liberalising the financial services sector, which should benefit the Chinese economy as well as foreign companies.  Yet the agreement, such as it is, seems more like a demonstration of goodwill than a resolution of the trade dispute. America’s concession is minor: although a tariff increase from 25% to 30% on around $250bn of imports from China will no longer go ahead, other tariffs are still scheduled to rise on December 15th. The Chinese government’s promise to purchase $40-50bn of agricultural products should help American farmers (assuming that the sales happen at a sufficiently high price). But trade is supposed to be about markets, not state intervention; trade experts fear that a move towards “managed trade” will further undermine the global trading system. China’s announced reforms to financial services are largely a restatement of old promises and may well not be implemented effectively. Lifting restrictions on foreign ownership within finance, for example, is not much use if the government then uses other regulations to hinder American companies. The big question for American businesses is whether this detente will hold. Progress so far seems to have been achieved by negotiators compartmentalising their differences. Mr Trump called the agreement “phase one” and added that the final deal would be so big that it would have to be completed sequentially. When negotiators move on to China’s subsidies, state-owned enterprises or data policies, talks are likely to get trickier. There are also live disputes that go beyond just trade. Robert Lighthizer, the United States Trade Representative, said that the matter of Huawei, the Chinese telecommunications giant that faces restrictions on its ability to sell to American companies owing to security concerns, was not part of the current round of discussions. On October 7th the Trump administration added 28 Chinese companies to its “entity list”, making it harder for them to do business with America, in response to the Chinese government’s human-rights abuses in the province of Xinjiang. A Chinese spokesman labelled the move “a grave violation of basic norms governing international relations and a flagrant interference in China's internal affairs.” For now the atmosphere among the trade negotiators has clearly improved. But truces have emerged before, only to collapse under a barrage of tweets. Ominously the two sides offered neither a joint statement nor a formal text setting out the deal. It is possible that, as in past rounds of talks, there are still misunderstandings that will only become apparent as the deal is formalised. The love fest may not endure. Over the coming weeks negotiators will try to hammer out the precise details. Mr Trump will then meet Mr Xi in Chile during a meeting of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum on November 13th and 14th, where he hopes to sign the text. Even if the two leaders do put pen to paper, businesses will still face immense uncertainty and hefty tariffs. The end of phase one may be in sight. But the end of this conflict is not.