THOSE WHO pick the winners of Nobel science prizes do sometimes plump for big and obvious names. Often, though, they seem to take great joy in shining the spotlight of fame onto researchers little known outside their own fields, let alone to the general public. This year’s prize in physiology or medicine is a classic of the genre. The laureates, William Kaelin, Sir Peter Ratcliffe and Gregg Semenza, have each contributed to a discovery that, though crucial to understanding how human bodies work, is almost invisible to the wider world. This discovery is how cells detect and adjust to the level of oxygen available to fuel their activities. Such biochemical arrangements almost always rely on feedback loops—and the crucial molecule in the loop that matches cell physiology to oxygen availability is a protein complex called hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF). HIF was discovered and named by Dr Semenza, who works at Johns Hopkins University, in Baltimore. In the 1990s Dr Semenza was studying erythropoiesis, the process that generates red blood corpuscles. These are the cells that carry oxygen in the bloodstream, and their number depends on how much oxygen there is around. Professional athletes, for example, often train at high altitude, where the thin air means oxygen is scarce, in order to grow extra red blood cells that will assist their respiration when they compete nearer to sea level.  The hormone that triggers erythropoiesis is called erythropoietin, or EPO. Indeed EPO, which is manufactured as a drug to help those with anaemia, is also used used illegally by some athletes to boost their red-cell count without the trouble of visiting high altitudes. (In cycling, for example, it is notorious.) Dr Semenza was looking at the stretch of DNA within the gene that encodes EPO which switches that gene on and off. In doing so he discovered HIF, a protein complex which, by attaching to or detaching from the relevant piece of DNA, does the switch-throwing. Since Dr Semenza’s initial discovery, around 300 genes similarly regulated by HIF have been found. Dr Kaelin’s contribution was to discover a further protein, VHL, that regulates how levels of HIF in a cell are controlled by oxygen levels. HIF actually consists of two proteins, now known as HIF-1 alpha and ARNT. ARNT is always present in a cell, but the level of HIF-1 alpha depends on the amount of oxygen present. More oxygen means less HIF-1 alpha. That, in turn, means less of the HIF complex. Genes like that for EPO, which rely on HIF to switch them on, thus remain inactive. Dr Kaelin, who works at the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute in Boston, was studying an inherited genetic illness called von Hippel-Lindau’s disease which greatly increases the likelihood of certain tumours (sometimes benign, sometimes malignant, affecting organs including the kidneys and eyes) developing. VHL is the protein encoded by the gene that, when mutated and thus non-functional, causes von Hippel-Lindau’s disease. Dr Kaelin showed that a non-functional VHL-encoding gene caused many HIF-regulated genes to go into overdrive—which is the underlying cause of the tumours in question. The pieces of the puzzle were then put together by Sir Peter, who works at Oxford University. He showed that VHL and HIF-1 alpha interact with one another, and that this interaction makes HIF-1 alpha susceptible to degradation in the presence of oxygen. The degradation is not direct. It is not that HIF-1 alpha is being oxidised. Rather it is mediated by protein-degrading cell components called proteosomes. The practical upshot of all this is a better understanding of the biology underlying anaemia, tumours such as those encouraged by von Hippel-Lindau’s disease and many other oxygen-sensitive processes. These include the healing of wounds, the growth of blood vessels (one reason for the link with tumours, since these need extra blood vessels in order to grow), and the likelihood of heart attacks and strokes. With luck, drugs tailored to regulate the actions of the various HIF-controlled genes involved will be able to promote or prevent these phenomena, as appropriate.