ON A BUZZING evening in 1921 Giacomo Balla, an Italian artist, approached his newly opened nightclub in Rome. He wore a glowing plastic tie; a neon sign above the door read: “If you don’t drink champagne, go away!” The club, named Bal Tic Tac, embodied the dynamism of the modernist aesthetic in every detail of its design, from dizzying patterned murals to angular light fixtures. It was a visionary meeting place of avant-garde ideas from across the world, championing American jazz and causing a small sensation by introducing the Italian party-going public to the saxophone. With hindsight, however, a shadow hangs over the utopian carousing. A year after Bal Tic Tac opened, Benito Mussolini’s fascist dictatorship would take power in Italy. This sort of jarring mismatch between politics and partying characterises many of the cafés, clubs and artistic hangouts documented in “Into the Night”, a new exhibition at the Barbican Centre in London. Given that the exhibition ranges from 1890s Paris to 1960s Tehran, it is striking how much the venues have in common with each other: their dependency on globalisation and cosmopolitanism, their historical contexts of upheaval and strife and the collisions of their radical aims with reality.  Getting across the spirit of these places in a gallery is tricky, not least because several of them were built around the idea of the Gesamtkunstwerk or “total artwork”, striving to aesthetically incorporate architecture, design, music and even the dance crazes of their patrons. At the Cabaret del Diavolo, another joint a few streets away from the Bal Tic Tac, Fortunato Depero, a Futurist artist, transformed three floors of a hotel into a recreation of Dante’s “Divine Comedy” (one floor each for heaven, hell and purgatory). Furniture, tapestries, paintings, textiles, coat hangers and even membership cards were produced by craftsmen in northern Italy to Depero’s precise specifications. The effect of even the single tapestry on display is potent, featuring as it does garish demons that appear to be either thrashing in pain or writhing in ecstasy. The exhibition attempts to get around the difficulty of representing such places by simply recreating them. On the ground floor, full-scale replicas of a few of the venues have been constructed, allowing the visitor to wander straight into the kaleidoscopic fin-de-siècle interior of the Viennese Cabaret Fledermaus, or the courtyard of a Nigerian Mbari club. This strategy achieves mixed results. The facsimile of the cinema-cum-dancehall of L’Aubette, a multi-purpose arts venue designed by Theo van Doesburg in 1926, is pleasantly disorientating. Bold geometric shapes break up the contours of the room like dazzle paint, mimicking the dissonance of modernist music, as abstract films by Hans Richter play on a built-in screen. A display of shadow puppets from the iconic Chat Noir cabaret in Paris works well, too. Other imitations are successful only in replicating the experience of visiting a real nightclub during the all-too-brightly lit hours of the day, which is invariably a let-down. The show explores the sober attitudes towards nighttime revelry, too. The neon sign of Bal Tic Tac—with a chorus line of jiving and jerking figures—was swiftly removed by city authorities for reasons of safety and aesthetic propriety. The interior of L’Aubette, meanwhile, was refurbished after less than a decade when the patrons demanded a more user-friendly space. Often, the clash with reality was darker. A drawing by Otto Dix of Anita Berber, a Weimar cabaret performer, makes visible a ghostly, melancholic face beneath a pantomime smear of make-up. Notorious for her outrageous dances with names like “Cocaine” and “Morphium”, Berber wrestled with addiction before dying at the age of 29. The Cabaret Voltaire in Zurich, the birthplace of the Dadaist movement, ran its short-lived but influential course for five months in 1916 while the bloody Battle of Verdun took place across the border. Sculptor Jean (Hans) Arp later recalled a futile sense that the Cabaret might “save mankind from the furious folly of these times”. The most pronounced historical influence on these venues, however, was cosmopolitanism. In the prelude to the period covered in “Into the Night”, progress in communication and transport technology had kickstarted a major phase of globalisation. This had cultural as well as economic effects: in the Mbari artists’ and writers’ clubs of Nigeria, following the end of colonial rule in the 1960s, indigenous artistic traditions fused with Western modernism, creating new forms. At the Rasht 29 club in Tehran, Iranian artists displayed their work to a soundtrack of Led Zeppelin and the Beatles. Even earlier, at the Golden Calf cabaret in Edwardian London, Chinese shadow dancing and barefoot “Greek” routines were performed alongside Morris dances. Even if these displays were reductive or exoticising, these clubs were early incubators of global cultural exchanges. “Into the Night: Cabarets and Clubs in Modern Art” runs until January 19th 2020 Picture credits: Ramón Alva de la Canal, “El Café de Nadie (Nobody’s Café)”, c. 1970, © DACS, 2019. Courtesy Private Collection; Elfriede Lohse-Wächtler, “Ausblick im Nachtlokal (View of a Nightclub)”, 1930, Private collection, Berlin; Aaron Douglas, “Dance”, c. 1930 © Heirs of Aaron Douglas/VAGA at ARS, NY and DACS.