The transcript below has been lightly edited for clarity. RG: Mr President, last time I asked you for an interview it was about twenty years ago and you were too busy sorting out the problems of Northern Ireland to see me. So thanks for that. We might need you again! [laughter]  RG: Let’s talk about South Africa. Over the years, many, many developing countries have achieved very high economic growth rates. You know, China managed to average 10% a year for three decades. India’s occasionally touched 8%. South Africa is not there yet. What do you think it would take to get very high growth in South Africa? A number of things. Firstly, the structure of our economy has been recognised as an impediment by the IMF. It’s a highly concentrated economy in terms of its ownership, in terms of its control. It’s never reached levels where the participation of your broader section of the economy, or people rather, have been able to participate, so you always had almost an elite that controls and manages and owns your economy. The IMF has decried that and said that holds the growth of the South African economy back because the monopolisation by a few firms in economic sectors in South Africa such that it blocks and impedes the energy and participation of many. And you can actually see it in a number of sectors, in banking for instance, you forever just have four major banks. You’re only beginning now to see one other and one other and it’s generating quite a lot of interest and activity amongst the people of South Africa. The other problem of course, it’s always been an economy that’s based on minerals complex. An economy that started off with mining, gold and diamonds and other minerals. And it’s forever remained there and it’s largely been an economy that’s been led by the export of commodities. The manufacturing base of the economy has largely been in support of the minerals complex that was set up. Of course the ravages of apartheid legacy then intervened, the education base of the country, is what has also set us back. Apartheid education did not do us any favours because it was largely based on blunting the capabilities of the large portion of your population. And you could compare us with a number of other countries and nearest country that I can think of without looking at a whole number of other things is Zimbabwe, also a colonial enclave like us, but they were never...and their colonialism was never underpinned by apartheid. It was just pure classical colonialism. And ours was the colonialism of a special type, where the policies, the social policies that were pursued were such that they held the majority of the people back and blunted their capabilities. And if you look at the laws that then were applied, the laws that we applied were preventative, allowing black people to conduct businesses in a number of places around the country and they could only do business in black areas. And that you’d never really found in many other colonial settings. Then, of course, majority of the people never got an opportunity to form assets for themselves and the one that was much more devastating was disposition of land, where land was taken away from the people and they then had to resort to being either migrant labourers in the mines and farms and they were bereft of any form of asset through which they can economically lead more viable lives. So all that has been a combination of constraints that our country has had to deal with. And it’s held us back, but that’s exactly what we are dealing with now. RG: So how do you overcome those things? How do you get to faster growth? How do we get faster growth...obviously, we’ve got to increase the skill base of South Africans. And that’s why we are focusing on our education. We also have to reform our state-owned enterprises, which in a number of ways have served the country well in terms of delivering, say if you like, social goods to the nation, in the form of undoing the damage of the past, which was an apartheid system that only sought to deliver social goods to a minority, like electricity, like water, like roads, like housing, and all those social goods if you like were just delivered to a minority. Now, state-owned enterprises, right from the beginning started with the process of delivering those social goods and that is why we were able to build more than 4m houses, we were able to ramp up the electricity provision to the nation to way above 85%, that’s why we were able to build clinics and all that. With time, some of those state-owned enterprises started to fall down. And they faltered because of corruption that set in. The state capture project that was embarked upon pulled us back and our education system did not have the desired outcomes. And that is why we’re focusing on revamping our education system: make sure that we do bring in more technical subjects at an early stage of education so that young people can opt for, if you like, technical education, so that they can become more useful in the economy. And these were opportunities that were never there under apartheid. So we’re bringing that in. RG: Okay. So your Treasury minister came up with a list of...specific policies that might accelerate growth. Do you endorse all of those? Some of them? I endorse all of them. I endorse them because they are the type of proposals that are going to boost the economic fortunes of our country. And of course, you can’t implement all of them at one go. There are those that you still need to negotiate and mediate with various social partners, be it business, be it labour, be it community… But the thrust is a positive one because that is precisely what our economy needs. In the main, they are about reforms. Reform your network industries, reform your telecommunications, your transport industries, reform your harbour industries or facilities rather. Reform your ease of doing business, the regulations, the red tape. Instead of having red tape, roll out the red carpet. Bring in business much more easily and reduce the costs. We’ve accumulated high costs in a number of sectors of our economy. Focus on sectors that can lead to greater growth, like for instance tourism. Open up the visa regime. Allow more and more tourists to come in your country that is so well endowed with the world wonders: Table Bay Mountain, the Kruger National Park and our beaches… Open up, the Chinese want to come and the Indians want to come, people from the Middle East want to come. We’ve had a visa regime that has prevented people from coming into the country, and people who want to come to do business, for education purposes...And we say, open that up so that people can come into our country. RG: It’s still pretty...sorry. Go on. The tourism industry will create easily more than one and a half...more than 1m jobs if you do all these things. And what that does is to lower the unemployment burden that we have. JM: Mr President, one of the recommendations in the Treasury document is to loosen up visas for foreign graduates. Is that something you endorse? I endorse completely. Completely, all the proposals that have been on the table for visa regime, for investors. What we need is to attract, attract your value adding people who want to come into South Africa. JM: So would you be happy to see essentially a kind of open doors policy for people with graduate level...people with degrees? Absolutely. Without any doubt. That I support, usually, because...and as I’ve always argued, you know, the Americans were very good at this. I mean, you look at Silicon Valley today, many of the people in Silicon Valley are non-US citizens. They’ve come in, they have created enormous and successful businesses, and we said let us do the same because when they come with skills and qualifications, they come to South Africa to boost our fortunes and that’s precisely what we need. RG: Yeah. There are a lot of things in that document, there are lots of reforms that need to be done... I’m glad you’ve read it! JM: We’ve done our homework. RG: …that are going to be difficult. So one of the...one example, it is very popular belief in South Africa that electricity should be free. Right? It’s very difficult to run an electricity company in an efficient way if people don’t pay their electricity bills. How do you make that argument? How do you tell people actually you’ve got to pay your power bills? Well that’s what I’m telling them. I’m telling them that just as you pay for your… for your cell phone charges, you...Nobody in South Africa ever says please give us cell phone usage for free. And I say so it must be when it comes to electricity charges. You cannot have a free ride on things that cost money to produce, and electricity is one of those that causes a huge amount of money to produce, and so everyone must pay. Now, most of this is based on some of the tactics that we used when we fought against apartheid and I was one of those who in the past was advocating for people to boycott paying rent, to boycott paying this in the townships. And I’m saying, the war is over, the struggle is over, we’ve now got to pay our way. We cannot continue relying on what we did in the past to bring down that monster of apartheid. We must now rebuild our country, reposition our country for future generations, and so everyone must pay. So we’re happy on user-pay principle as the way to go. And of course, because apartheid wrought such a devastating impact on our people, there are people who are not able to pay, who are the indigents. These are like, you know, grandmothers, older women and all that...those we recognise and we say, we will give you certain kilowatts of power for free, but through your little pension that you get from the state (because we’ve become almost a welfare state) you should still be able to pay. So, in the end, we’re spreading a message, a very broad message for everyone to pay their way through. There should be no free rides. JM: You mentioned state-owned enterprises. Are you considering or would you consider the Treasury suggestion to sell off some of Eskom’s assets in order to cover its debts? I addressed this issue in Parliament two or three days ago when the question was raised. They were saying would you sell some of those and I said we’ve been building brand new modern power stations, there’s just no way we can sell those. There are a number of power stations that are old and could be closed. Now, the problem with those is that they are linked to towns, they are linked to communities and there are workers there. However, along the way we have found and been approached by a number of entities, some of them private equity, some of them entrepreneurial, and so forth, who say give us some of these power stations, we can extend their lives, we can breathe more life into them. And I said, I am open to such being parcelled out on condition that for instance, communities and workers will have a just transition, where...either in terms of ownership, in terms of the management thereof, there’ll be involvement. If those entities say, because these power stations are costing you too much money and to a point where you want to close them, we can take them on and generate further electricity for 10, 20 years and put it into the grid or sell it into the grid. I’m open to that. And there are quite a number of entities that have approached us in that regard. And they’ve even said we will introduce new technologies like cleaning up the coal and all that. So I’m open to that because right now, they’re just too expensive for our electricity, Eskom, to run them and that is why after 37 years or 40 years, they want to close them. So if a new life can be breathed into them by different sort of players, and there are quite a number of such players, I say, Bob is your uncle. JM: Mr President, that’s quite a good example. Some of the coal communities in Mpumalanga are presumably what you were referring to. There are always going to be some losers in any reform process [for sure, yeah.] I’m just curious about how determined you are to push some of these ideas through. Because sometimes you’ve been accused of trying to please everybody to try to find a way through the thorny politics of South Africa. Do you have a sense of urgency? Are you up for the fight? I’m up to the fight, to get everybody to be a winner. So I prefer win-win solutions. But of course, there comes a time when there will be losers along the way. And I know the media is much more interested in the losers. What are you going to do with the losers, because certain people will lose anyway, I argue that where you can avoid calamitous outcomes, find solutions for that. And having been a trade unionist, and having been a negotiator at the constitutional talks, I’m well adept at saying you can craft types of outcomes and compromises where everybody rises from the table feeling that they are a winner. They’ve gotten something out of the dialogue that took place. And I see that as an outcome of what I call smart partnerships. You can craft smart partnerships, where, you know, you try to prosper, everyone, even if they lose, they walk away feeling that at least we’ve got something that is meaningful for us to carry on. JM: Sorry, but what about the people who aren’t at the table? What about the 40% of South Africans who are effectively unemployed? Isn’t there a risk that if your modus operandi is constantly trying to make sure that all these different interest groups are appeased, then it becomes a kind of form of corporatism, where actually, you’re not really making any proper reforms, you’re just kind of giving a little bit to all these interest groups and South Africa remains sluggish... In the end, I mean, it is also those people who are not at the table that I’m also most concerned about. I have to be concerned about all South Africans. I cannot be concerned about sectional interests. I’m not a sectional interest president, I’m a president of all South Africans. And my job is to make sure that as many South Africans as possible do, in the end, find their place in the sun. And I’m creating...I seek to create those opportunities where everyone will have a sliver of the sun, not, you know, special interests just hogging the space just for themselves. So my approach is: find solutions. And that is why I’m stressing this issue of a just transition. And I’m saying let us define what a just transition is. And a just transition, for instance for working people, as we decommission some of the power stations…some of them may well be taken up by other private players and some of them may have to be closed and I say ‘what is the just transition?’ Just transition must mean we look at the socio-economic positioning of the area, where those power stations are, the workers. Are we able to reskill them? Are we able to upskill them? Are we able to accommodate them in the renewable energy architecture that we’re trying to build, as we decommission these [coal-fire plants], and there are for ever so many opportunities. I look...I say out of every disastrous situation, there must be opportunities that we can eke out to give everybody a place in the sun. RG: So one example then: education. Clearly you’re not going to get to the best possible education for people until you have teachers who are picked on the basis of whether they can teach and who are fired if they don’t show up to work. [Yeah] That’s going to cause trouble. Are you confident you’re going to be able to push that through? Absolutely. I mean, that’s precisely the conversation. For me, it starts off with a conversation. A conversation where we show the stark realities of the choices we have to make. And I’ve been, I’ve been saying even to our allies in the trading union movement that we’ve got to make choices and we’ve got to make trade-offs. Because if we don’t, if we don’t make this choice, this is the outcome. And the outcome could well be harmful to everyone. And it’s almost like, you know, when you have a disease like diabetes, in the end and they say, your toe is either so bad, it’s rotten, and you say, no I don’t want my toe to be amputated, then it could well mean that your whole leg and your whole life could be, you know, at risk. Then you’ve got to make choices and there are trade-offs that you’ve got to make. JM: Dr Ramaphosa, when are you going to operate? [laughter] People are asking... People are asking and they want the operation...One of the things they want is, you know, when are you going to arrest people? When it comes to corruption, when are you going to put people into jail, when are you going to, you know, do this and this? And I say my job as the executive authority of the country is to put in place the institutions. I strengthen the institutions, I make sure that the institutions function. And I’m also a process-oriented type of person. Set up the foundations, so that whatever happens and whoever is in office will find that there are strong foundations. And we never ever get back to what we had in the nine years [under Jacob Zuma]. So I’m setting up the foundations and with the foundations we will be able to withstand whatever earthquake or whatever calamity we have. So those institutions are now being strengthened, they’re in place, they’re the prosecuting institutions, the tax institutions...I mean, our tax office was captured, it was attacked left, right and centre. We’re rebuilding it now... JM: Will these institutions...Do they have a free reign to go after everybody? Yes. JM: I mean, are you proud, for example, that Ace Magashule is the Secretary General of the ANC? Once the institutions are strengthened and they are made capable, they should be able to go against anyone, including the president, if the president is found to be complicit. And I’ve always said that we all have to be accountable. The type of legal system that we have [is one] which we need to safeguard and protect. And remember, I played a small, tiny role in the drafting of our legal framework [laughter]. So I want those institutions to work within the framework that we have, and it is embedded, rooted, around accountability. And whoever it is...our legal system must be such that whoever it is, be it president, priests, judge or whoever, must be accountable. That for me is non-negotiable, non-negotiable whatsoever. When it comes to accountability, we all have to be accountable whoever we are. So I want those institutions without fear, favour or prejudice to go against anyone. Now, the president’s job is not to go and arrest people. The president’s job is not about charging people. It is to strengthen those institutions that must do their work. Independently. RG: Can I ask you about China and Africa? How big do you think the opportunity and risks are of South Africa’s and Africa’s dealings with China? I think if you deal with any country, and especially from a principle point of view, where you seek to advance the interests of your own people and your own country, and you act on principle and do not make yourself susceptible to influences that will militate against the interests of your people, you are better positioned, because the principles that you’ve adopted will act as good shock absorbers for you not to be captured as it were. So, for instance, when it comes to China, China has its own interests on Africa. And so does any country, the US, the UK and Germany, they all have their interests, they want to promote those. And my argument is, in all this, we must be willing to promote our own interests and promote them in a way where we do not compromise our sovereignty. We do not compromise our own national interests. We should always seek to be...to mitigate the risks that are present in any relationship that you have with any nation in the world. So our relationship with China is based on principle; it’s based on ‘foster your neighbour’ type of principle where we want to gain the best out of that relationship, so do they, and we are all aware of what, you know, would be of great interest to us. And we don’t want to compromise ourselves and to sacrifice our sovereignty. Where we agree, we agree; where we disagree, we disagree and we draw the line. That’s basically for me how I approach dealings with another country like China. RG: Do you think the rest of Africa has got the balance right there? I mean, because you’ve got lots of investment coming in, but there’s a question of how you pay the debts afterwards. Well every country has to, you know, craft its own way of how to create that balance. And they need to harp on the issue of not selling and short-changing their sovereignty. That, for me, is the most important thing. They have to craft their own. RG: There’s been talk about the African Continental Free Trade Agreement (AFCTA), the idea that over time you break down the barriers between African countries so that people can more freely trade and invest with each other. How far do you think that can go? In 50 years’ time, would you see something similar to what the European Union has today, in terms of freedom to move and trade? JM: And then you could leave it [laughter]. RG: Please, please, let’s not go there... …Yeah, I see that eventuating. I really see that happening. And I think, you know, in a funny sort of way, what for instance the EU has been able to do is what we should learn from. The good parts are what we should be learning from. And in a way, it’s sometimes good to do something after others have done it because you can perfect it. So, I see a much better you know, ACFTA, than you have an EU, which will possibly not lead to a point where people will have a desire to leave [laughter]. We want to see enhanced investment. And in a way it is going to be a great boon to the continent, a boon in the sense that now that we’ve finally agreed that we should have this...it will take time to gel fully into place, but the boon is going to increase infrastructure investment. Because you’ve got to have electricity to make sure that you become a manufacturer, you produce goods that can be sold across various countries. It’s going to enable you to have roads so that people can move quite easily. And for me, it’s also going to help in cementing peace on the African continent. It willbe an enabler of peace because with it should silence the guns forever, because you want to trade, you don’t want to fight with people that you need to trade with. You don’t want to be at war against a nation that you know can boost your economic fortunes. So it’s going to enhance peace, it’s going to enhance that cohesion that we’ve always aspired for, or to, as Africans. JM: As we’ve proven you’re a wonderful talker. I’m just wondering, where’s...back to Dr Ramaphosa again, when’s the operation? When will, for example, there be a new Eskom head? When will there be clarity on what’s happening to the structure of it, to its debt? When will we might...I know you’re not in charge of prosecutions, but when can the South African public hope to see some progress on that? Because everyone agrees you have the right ideas, but they’re waiting to see...that you’re getting your scrubs on. Okay. It’s a good question. Let me answer the first part in this way. We’re going to have a medium-term budget statement and ahead of that we’re going to give greater clarity on the growth story strategy that we want to embark on, but which will be underpinned not only by the Treasury paper, which will be underpinned by a whole lot of other ventures that we’re going to take, including Eskom, head of Eskom and all that. So, you want to see...me to take you to the operating room I will take you to the operating room at the time. [laughter]. On the prosecutions I, like you, have to wait truly for Shamila Batohi [the head of the National Prosecuting Authority] and the various other institutions, the tribunals, that we’ve put in place, that we have financially enabled in terms of giving them the resources in order to complete their work. And they’ve been...they’re pros, they’re independent and they have integrity, they are meticulous. And we need to wait for that to happen and it is going to happen. It definitely is going to happen. And I know people are so impatient. It forever reminds me...I don’t know if you’ve ever been into movie watching? I used to...I’ve always loved the film called Force 10 from Navarone, where they… it was David Niven who was acting [sic]…when there was a bomb expert. He went and blew up the dam, the belly of the dam, and it was like a “poof” type of explosion and Gregory Peck [sic] was his ...And he said is that all? Is that all here today? And he said yes, wait for it. It is working itself into the wall of the dam. And he says it is irrevocable. It is going to happen. And he said, this dam wall is going to break up. And he was impatient. He said it doesn’t seem to be working. And I say, it is irrevocable. What has happened in our country does need a follow up, there has to be accountability, and it is going to happen. The challenge is that people want it yesterday. And if it’s got to be successful, it cannot be yesterday. It’s got to be done properly. And the professionals, who are independent, who are real professionals, are doing their work and they will deliver. RG: South Africa, certainly when I was growing up, the one question that people asked was always about race. It was always about race relations in the country, will the country be able to find some way that the different races will be able to live together. To what extent do you think you’ve got beyond that, and you’re dealing with just practical questions of, you know, how do you boost growth? How do you get electricity to people? At the meta level I think we’ve been able to make it work, that race should no longer be a determinant of the fortune of people’s lives and the fortune of the country. So in the end, that formal apartheid, formal way in which race had an impact has come to an end. However, the attitudinal racism is still deeply embedded in the structure of South African society. It is still there and in many ways you still see it being played out. But fortunately, the laws and the new dispensation that we’ve put in place is whittling it down. And some of it will take time. For instance, when we have to deal with things like, you know, just opportunities, opportunities. It will take time, opportunities that should be available to all South Africans, especially women in our country, but especially black women, because as we’ve often said, it is the black women of our country who bore the greatest brand of apartheid, from a race perspective, from a class perspective, as well as from a gender perspective. So they have suffered triple oppression as it were. So that in a number of ways continues because it is still deeply embedded in the fabric of the nation. But we...through the laws, through the new conventions, we’re seeking to whittle that down. And the struggle continues to rid South Africa of racial influence in many, many ways, particularly the racism that slips through under the laws of the country. Because the new laws of the country are completely against racism and our Constitution is anti-racism, and it calls for equality, so we’re whittling it down. So the superstructure of racism has fallen down. But it is at the micro level where it impacts on the lives of ordinary people. And it has its manifestations through poverty, through exclusion of opportunity, and that is what we need to get rid of still. So it’s still a long way. The legacy of apartheid lives on in our country. It definitely lives on. And let’s remember that it took 340 years, a solid 340 years for racism to be baked perfect, since Jan van Riebeeck landed in South Africa in 1652, 300 years before I was born. It is still there and to rid the country of that form of legacy will take time. But I’m pleased to say that we’re passing laws, we’re changing conventions on an ongoing basis to change all that. So the future is bright for South Africa in many, many ways. JM: Are you glad you got the job now as opposed to in the 1990s? [Laughter] It’s a difficult one to answer. It’s a tough job, I must say. It’s not an easy job. Quite difficult being president of South Africa at this point in time, particularly with the economy being where it is. I wish I’d come in when the economy was better. So I drew the worst side of the straw [laughter]. Dig deeper South Africa’s president promises big results—eventually, October 17th 2019 Cyril Ramaphosa is running out of time to reform South Africa, October 17th 2019