ON THE second anniversary of America’s deadliest mass shooting to date, survivors, loved ones and well-wishers gathered in the Las Vegas Community Healing Garden. Families grieved and strangers hugged among stones painted with the names of the dead. A man played a mournful version of “Somewhere Over the Rainbow” on a white plastic recorder. Later that evening, the congregation would go to the place where 58 people were killed and hundreds injured to hold a candlelight vigil. Two days later on October 4th, victims received some small consolation in the form of a settlement. MGM Resorts International, the company that owned both the lot where the Route 91 music festival took place and the hotel room in the Mandalay Bay that the shooter used, agreed to pay out up to $800m. This settles a number of lawsuits brought against the company for failing to take actions that might have prevented the tragedy.  The very nature of settlements means that MGM’s motivation remains opaque. It admits no liability. Most likely, litigation would have been drawn out and costly. Putting aside the amount MGM would pay if the ruling went against it, the legal fees and reputational damage incurred would have been significant. And the decision to go to trial in such cases is often made by the insurance carrier, which is on the hook for much of the cost. MGM was insured to the tune of $751m. All of this raises a fraught question: should MGM have been the entity responsible for compensating the victims, rather than, say, the firms that manufactured and sold the weapons used in the massacre? Gun manufacturers and sellers enjoy unparalleled protections from such lawsuits. The Protection of Lawful Commerce in Arms Act (PLCAA), passed in 2005, grants firearms manufacturers and dealers broad immunity from liability when their products are used in a crime. No other industry is afforded such protection, according to Heidi Li Feldman, a law professor at Georgetown University. That forces victims of mass shootings to seek compensation elsewhere. This enviable status may have inspired MGM’s initial legal strategy. In 2018 the company sought a declaratory judgment that would prevent victims from seeking legal relief. It appealed to the Support Anti-terrorism by Fostering Effective Technologies Act (also known as the SAFETY Act), a statute passed in the wake of the September 11th attacks and designed to protect sellers of “qualified anti-terrorism technologies” from liability in the event of an attack. MGM argued that it was not liable because it had employed a security company, Contemporary Services Corporation, that was certified by the Department of Homeland Security (DHS). In deploying this novel argument, it effectively claimed that the SAFETY Act should pre-empt claims of liability, just as PLCAA does for gun manufacturers and vendors. No ruling was reached on the case prior to the settlement. Had DHS decided in MGM’s favour, it would have set a precedent protecting entertainment venues where mass shootings occur from liability. That MGM settled means the public will never know what safety measures the company employed. Had MGM instead defended itself against the victims’ claims in court, a verdict on its security procedures could have informed security practices across the industry. Absent this ruling, says Ms Feldman, entertainment venues still do not know what level of security is necessary to protect them from liability in the event that a mass shooting happens on their premises. They are left with two choices: venues can take defensive measures to protect themselves by improving their security precautions and upping their insurance, or they can respond aggressively and fight to repeal PLCAA, which would allow victims to bring litigation against gun manufacturers and sellers. If entertainment venues were to take this second route, they would find numerous allies. The day before the settlement, nine Democratic presidential candidates spoke at the 2020 Gun Safety Forum in Las Vegas. All of them have explicitly committed to fighting to repeal PLCAA, and several are co-sponsors of legislation already introduced in Congress that aims to do so. In the last few years, a number of cases have been brought to test the limits of PLCAA, including one related to the Las Vegas shooting. Given the shocking number of Americans who die in mass shootings, perhaps it is time that the gun industry accepts its share of the responsibility.