The Economist was founded as a print newspaper in 1843, but today we have a growing digital operation and 50m followers on our social media accounts. Ever more people are encountering our journalism for the first time on Twitter, Facebook, Instagram or LinkedIn. The social media team comprises creative and enterprising journalists, some of whom join us on one-year fellowships to help shape The Economist’s digital future. We are now recruiting a new fellow to work in our London newsroom.  The position would suit a graduate of a journalism course or someone who has some limited experience in editorial roles and is ready to take on a full-time role for a year. Applicants should be seeking to establish themselves firmly in an editorial department while learning through doing. The bulk of the work will be to produce posts for a variety of social media platforms, promoting the best of our journalism. To do this, the successful candidate will collaborate with section editors and news editors in London and around the world, as well as colleagues who produce our films, podcasts and Instagram Stories. Are you a diligent writer who can absorb an article and turn out material that will shine on crowded timelines? Are you looking for a role where you can learn, experiment and work with some of the world’s smartest journalists and editors? Are you eager to help shape and improve The Economist’s digital presence? If you answer yes to these questions, we’d like to hear from you. Send the following items to edsocialjob@economist.com Successful candidates will be hired on one-year contracts and paid £2,000 per month. The deadline for applications is Sunday, November 10th 2019. Applicants must be eligible to work in the UK. We are looking for someone to start in January 2020. Requirements The Economist Group values diversity. We are committed to equal opportunities and creating an inclusive environment for all our employees. We welcome applicants regardless of ethnic origin, national origin, gender, race, colour, religious beliefs, disability, sexual orientation or age.