BEYOND THE usual “Dracula” and “Frankenstein” fare, period-specific horror films are considered sufficiently esoteric that few directors have attempted to make them. Robert Eggers is a rare exception. His first film, “The Witch” (2015), was set in Puritan colonial times and depicted a devout family of Plymouth Rock separatists who come to believe themselves cursed by a malevolent spirit. The group eventually settles on the eldest daughter as the source of both this demon and all their misfortunes. Clever and claustrophobic, “The Witch” was an audacious psychological thriller. “The Lighthouse”, Mr Eggers’s new offering (co-written with his brother, Max), has the same confined spaces and obsessive attention to detail evident in “The Witch”. A maritime nightmare captured in black-and-white 35mm film, it lights upon the craggy cliffs of Nova Scotia in the late 19th century. It begins with a yellow-bellied workman, Ephraim Winslow (Robert Pattinson), arriving at the remote, foreboding lighthouse that has long been the domain of a curmudgeonly keeper, Thomas Wake (Willem Dafoe). Winslow is in training to become a “wickie”, one of the maintenance men who oversee the beacons for years on end without any human contact (an occupation designed to drive its practitioners mad if ever there was one).  Winslow’s apprenticeship under Wake quickly turns sour on account of philosophical differences. The habitually drunk Wake brings an almost religious fervor to his role; the teetotaling Winslow, on the run from a shameful past, is mostly in it for the money. As cabin fever sets in, Winslow does turn to the bottle; he becomes paranoid, stalking and menacing Wake. For his part, Wake also seems to be hiding dark secrets: he forbids his squire from entering the lantern room, where the light itself is stored. It is not clear at any point which man has the upper hand, and that sense of unease exacerbates the film’s hallucinatory quality. Later, as Winslow experiences visions of tentacled monsters and lascivious mermaids, reality itself seems lost at sea. The film is better at creating a fearsome atmosphere than an engaging plot, and though the lighthouse itself exudes a sinister Gothic character, its two inhabitants are the true beacons. Mr Pattinson and Mr Dafoe enthusiastically take up the challenges of their roles: Mr Dafoe bellows sea shanties and growls dire proclamations from behind his smoking pipe. Mr Pattinson, though initially subdued, charts his character’s unhinging with ease: a showdown between himself and a pestering seagull ends in a shocking display of cruelty. The two actors play off each other wonderfully, exchanging barbs, slaps and flatulence. Though Mr Eggers has created era-specific spooks for modern audiences, he also manages to transcend the usual confines of both period dramas and the horror genre. The extreme solitude of his characters, both here and in “The Witch”, removes them somewhat from the confines of time and gives space for audiences to insert their own interpretations. In its final act, Mr Eggers allows “The Lighthouse” to move from period novelty into timeless myth. It is sure to unsettle and delight viewers for generations to come. “The Lighthouse” is released in America on October 18th and in Britain on January 31st 2020