IN 1988 A gallery in New York invited artists to imagine a non-military, non-political future use for the demilitarised zone (DMZ), the four-kilometre-wide strip of land that has separated North and South Korea since the ceasefire of 1953. Nam June Paik, a Korean-American, suggested creating a tiger farm to attract Japanese tourists. His compatriot Mo Bahc, also a resident in New York at the time, designed an amulet and sent it to six heads of state. Presidents and prime ministers alike were instructed to burn the amulet and drink the ashes, while wishing sincerely for reunification.  A no-go area for citizens on both sides of the divide, the heavily fortified DMZ today remains a place of barbed wire and landmines. Yet for many artists, it is also a place of mystery— “an unknown world”, suggests SooJin Lee, an art historian, “similar to the concept of outer space that is explored in science-fiction”. Since its foundation in 2011, the South Korea-based Real DMZ Project has focused on the zone from an artistic standpoint. In formal terms the war has never ended, but recent events have made the group more hopeful of peace. The meetings that took place inside the DMZ in 2018 between Moon Jae-in, South Korea’s president, and Kim Jong Un, the North Korean dictator, the practical steps that followed to reduce tension and the summits between Mr Kim and Donald Trump (even though they produced few tangible results) have generated a tentative optimism. Last March the Real DMZ Project mounted an impressive exhibition at the old Seoul railway station, where in pre-war times travellers might have boarded a train for Sinuiju, north of Pyongyang. Now “Negotiating Borders”, an exhibition at the Korean Cultural Centre in London, presents a version of that show. It opens with an animated film by Dongsei Kim. “A Construct the Koreas (Never) Made Together: Deconstructing the DMZ for the Imaginary” (2019) is a rapid-fire geopolitical primer that mixes disturbing facts (there are still some 2.2bn landmines in the area) with more heartening ones (20 guard posts were removed in 2018; migrating cranes are oblivious to politics). More scene-setting comes in the form of archival material from the exhibition in 1988 that involved Bahc and Paik. Kyungah Ham’s current efforts are just as subversive. Two versions of her glossy, embroidered “chandeliers” shimmer on the wall; the captions, intriguingly, list “middle man, smuggling, bribe, tension, anxiety and censorship” among the materials. Having come across propaganda flyers from the North, the artist began to imagine communicating with “unknowable people” there and so her Embroidery Project was born. Ms Ham produces images and texts digitally and sends them via middle men in China or Russia to be embroidered by women in North Korea. It is risky: sometimes work is censored by the authorities; sometimes the intermediaries disappear with her cash. For his photographic project “Blow Up” (2005-07), Seung Woo Back visited Pyongyang in 2001. His movements were monitored closely, so he abandoned any hope of producing interesting or original pictures. It was only when he later returned to the images and began enlarging them that—like the fashion photographer in the cult film from 1966 which his title alludes to—he spotted things he had not seen. The result is a wall of 40 fresh images: passengers on a trolley bus; boys on a diving board; a Stalinist-style statue glimpsed over a girl’s shoulder. Other parts of the show highlight different aspects of the DMZ. Lee Bul’s “Study for Aubade V” (2019) is made of steel from a demolished check point. Archive photographs document life in the border villages: street cleaning in Cheorwon; a beauty contest in Yanggu in 1969. Soldiers pose for the cameras. And a beautiful set of images catalogue plants growing in the zone. Such studies classically show the roots, but here landmines make it too dangerous to dig them up. Two paintings by Joung-Ki Min hanging side by side underline the new optimism the exhibition seeks to capture. In 1981, the artist had depicted a man and woman holding tight to each other beside a barbed-wire fence. The doom and gloom of “Embrace” is a world away from the mood of “Goseong” (2019), which he made after visiting the DMZ in January. Here Mr Min has squeezed a guard post and barbed wire into the bottom right-hand corner in order to draw the viewer’s gaze up over the ridge that forms the border and deep into the North Korean landscape. “How long have we endured this partition?” he asks. “It’s remarkable, surprising, worrying, exciting and shattering to see all that has been unfolding recently…” “Negotiating Borders” is at the Korean Cultural Centre until November 23rd