WATCHING MARTIN SCORSESE’S “The Irishman” is a bit like watching his favourite band, the Rolling Stones, performing acoustic arrangements of their greatest hits. A crime epic which reunites Mr Scorsese with the lead actors from “Goodfellas” and “Casino”, Robert De Niro and Joe Pesci, the three-and-a-half-hour film, based on a true story, offers little more than slower, quieter, more reflective renditions of some familiar refrains. But it is still a privilege to see these pop-culture legends working together again for what could well be the last time. Besides, even in their 70s, they are the best in the world at what they do. “The Irishman” opens with one of Mr Scorsese’s signature tracking shots, but on this occasion the camera isn’t prowling around a glitzy nightclub. It is making its stately way along the corridors of a drab retirement home, past wheelchairs and oxygen canisters, until it reaches the frail, white-haired Frank Sheeran (Mr De Niro), a former Mafia hitman. This sly self-referential joke is a warning that the film won’t just be about the thrills and spills of gangster life, but about its undignified aftermath—assuming it has an aftermath (many characters are introduced with a caption detailing when and how they will die).  Sheeran is one of the few men in his circle to reach a ripe old age, and he narrates his own biography in a series of flashbacks, and flashbacks within flashbacks. In Italy during the second world war, he learns how to follow orders without question, even if those orders involve killing unarmed men. Back home in Philadelphia, this attitude endears him to a Pennsylvania mob boss named Russell Bufalino (Mr Pesci, riveting as a dapper but wizened goblin, dripping with evil). Sheeran is soon busy “painting houses”: ie, shooting people in the head. His efficiency and loyalty are such that he is appointed to be an intermediary between Bufalino and Jimmy Hoffa (Al Pacino), the president of the Teamsters union. Via the megalomaniacal Hoffa, Sheeran is even drawn into the Kennedys’ orbit. But his violent career eventually alienates his family, and requires him to make even more painful personal sacrifices. Much like “Goodfellas” and “Casino”, “The Irishman” does not have a conventional plot. Adapted by Steven Zaillian from “I Heard You Paint Houses”, Charles Brandt’s biography of Sheeran, the film is a gloriously funny, fascinating, tragicomic anthology of colourful gangland anecdotes. There are bombings, shootings and spells in prison. Shiny vintage cars and classic pop songs cruise by at regular intervals. Sheeran’s voice-over offers tips on the best pistol to use for each job, as well as translations of Mafia lingo. If someone says they are “a little concerned”, they are frantic. If someone says “it is what it is”, then someone else is about to be murdered. The decline and fall, when it comes, is not entirely new to the Scorsese canon: in “Casino”, the last film which he, Mr De Niro and Mr Pesci made together, the antihero is reduced from being a celebrity high-roller to a small-time tipster. What is novel about “The Irishman” is that, having been given a colossal Netflix budget (his biggest ever), the director has used digital de-ageing to allow his actors to play the same characters through the decades. The “youthification”, as Mr Scorsese calls it, is reasonably effective. The artificially smoothed skin doesn’t seem quite real; the characters’ faces sometimes have the bright colours of people in hand-tinted postcards. None of this is too distracting. What is distracting, though, is that even when Mr De Niro’s wrinkles have been digitally airbrushed, he still doesn’t have the lean frame or the twitchy energy he had back when he and Mr Scorsese were making “Mean Streets” and “Taxi Driver”. The stocky, hunched and shuffling Sheeran never looks as if he is under 50, so it is ridiculous to hear other characters refer to him as “the kid”. In one brief war flashback, he is less like a fledgling GI than Private Godfrey from “Dad’s Army”. The casting of Mr De Niro is justified, to an extent, by the scenes in which Sheeran is supposed to be old. The film is at its most powerful when, in his last years, his friends are dying and his relatives are leaving, but he still does not understand what he has done wrong. The casting of Mr Pacino as Hoffa is another matter. It may be a treat to see him relishing the role of a boastful, blustering carnival barker. But should a rheumy-eyed actor in his late 70s really be cast as a man who is 39 when the viewer first sees him, and who disappears at the age of 62? To come back to the Rolling Stones analogy, the “youthification” is the equivalent of the venerable band deciding to autotune (digitally alter the pitch of) their vocals. As impressive as it might be to hear them embracing modern technology, most fans would wish that they hadn’t bothered. “The Irishman” is released in cinemas in America on November 1st and in Britain on November 8th. It will be available worldwide on Netflix from November 27th