TOURISTS FLOCK to Kendal, a town in north-west England, for its rural beauty, tea rooms and mint cake (a local sugary confection favoured by hikers). Few day-trippers expect to stumble across an exhibition of gay erotica. Yet earlier this month, as part of the Lakes International Comic Art Festival, Kendal hosted “Let’s Go Camping with Tom of Finland”, a show of work by the 20th-century artist. Held in a former mint-cake factory, the event reflects a changing view of gay desire. Where once such pieces would have been dismissed as merely obscene, representations of sex are increasingly appreciated for their artistic qualities. Touko Laaksonen was an art student in Finland when the second world war broke out. After he was conscripted into the army he began to have sex with men; Laaksonen’s biographer, Valentine Hooven, wrote that he “found nirvana in the blackouts”. Homosexuality in Finland was a criminal offence until 1971, so after the war Laaksonen lived out many of his fantasies on paper. He drew rendezvous between hyper-masculine characters with bulging muscles. They were often in uniform, as idealised versions of the men he’d met during the war.  In 1956 a friend urged Laaksonen to send his artwork to Physique Pictorial, an American magazine that ostensibly promoted fitness—it featured scantily clad figures in athletic poses—but was really aimed at gay men. To protect his identity he signed his drawings “Tom”, and he became known as Tom of Finland. His explicit scenarios quickly acquired a large following. The character Kake, a hulking beefcake in tight leathers, became the archetypal gay “daddy”. Throughout the 1970s and 1980s Tom drew comics, exhibited his work around America and befriended other artists, including Andy Warhol and Robert Mapplethorpe. “Let’s Go Camping” spans Laaksonen’s whole career, from early doodles as a child to the final appearance of Kake in “The Oversexed Office”, an orgiastic comic set in the workplace. His gleeful celebration of gay sex took on darker themes during the AIDS crisis, while the art establishment sneered at both the cartoon form and his subject matter. But the exhibition points out the drawings’ impressive depth, technical skill and humour. Richard Foster, one of the festival’s directors, notes the links to Renaissance artists’ chiselled male forms in Laaksonen’s work. There are less expected influences, too: the playful looks between Tom’s men recall the outrageous caricatures of Thomas Rowlandson, a Georgian-era British cartoonist. Mr Foster even suggests, tongue firmly in cheek, that one frame in “Camping”, a comic from 1976, bears a resemblance to Il Rosso’s 16th-century painting of Christ being gazed upon adoringly by angels. In this case, Jesus is replaced by a less holy (but much better endowed) figure, and his acolytes are far from angelic. Laaksonen’s style was influential, evident in David Hockney’s swimming-pool paintings, Jean Paul Gaultier’s fashion designs and the films of Derek Jarman. Since his death in 1991, Laaksonen’s pop-culture legacy has only increased. “Tom of Finland”, a biographical film, was released in 2017, and the Finnish postal service celebrated his work with a racy set of stamps. Next year, events around the world will mark the centenary of his birth. Such renewed critical attention is indicative of a wider trend in the West, where sexually explicit art is being appraised on its own merits. Robert Mapplethorpe, an American photographer whose images of naked men sparked outrage in the 1980s and were denounced in Congress, was the subject of a major exhibition at the Guggenheim in New York this summer. It looked beyond the graphic nature of Mapplethorpe’s images to consider how he presented the bodies of black models, and what he aimed to portray beyond pure desire. A follow-up show featured queer artists’ responses to Mapplethorpe’s work. Less than a hundred miles from Kendal, meanwhile, Tate Liverpool is currently hosting the first major exhibition in Britain of Keith Haring’s graffiti-like paintings, which feature anthropomorphic penises and entwined male figures. His large public works, and collaborations with celebrities such as Grace Jones and Vivienne Westwood, spread not only his art to the public but his sex-positive message, too (he was an activist and AIDS campaigner). Critics have declared the Tate’s show to be one of the most important of the year. As the Western world has become more accepting of same-sex relationships, artistic expressions of gay desire have found a more receptive audience (not that its representation is anything new—last year Tate Britain hosted an exhibition of queer British art dating back to 1861). When a show of Francis Bacon’s work in London in 1955 was investigated by the police for obscenity, the raciest painting on display was of two abstract male figures lying together in the grass. The strongest objection to “Let’s Go Camping”, meanwhile, came in the form of one sternly worded letter from a bemused visitor.