NORTHERN BOTSWANA is a land of strange contrast. Drive west from Francistown, the country’s second city, and you skirt Makgadikgadi, a white, salt-encrusted plain that is bone dry for most of the year, but which blossoms into sudden, abundant life during the wet season. Follow the road farther, and you arrive at Maun, on the edge of the lush inland delta of the Okavango river, the fourth longest in southern Africa. Two hundred thousand years ago, though, Makgadikgadi was also lush. Both it and the delta were part of a lake, the largest in Africa, surrounded by wetlands. For wildlife, the result was a veritable paradise—a fortuitous comparison, for, if the latest research is correct, it is to here that everyone alive today can trace their ancestry. That Homo sapiens began as an African species was pretty-much proved in the 1980s by Allan Wilson of the University of California, Berkeley, who looked at a special type of DNA which is passed, unmixed by sexual reproduction, from a mother to her children. This so-called mitogenome is independent of a cell’s nucleus, where the rest of the genes are found. It resides in structures called mitochondria that are the billion-year descendants of once-free-living bacteria and which now act as a cell’s power pack.  Family trees of present-day human mitogenomes, their branches caused by mutations over the millennia, all have their roots in Africa and converge on a single, unknown woman, nicknamed Mitochondrial Eve. Subsequently, a similar scientific trick performed on DNA from the Y-chromosome, which is passed unmixed from father to son, established the idea of a Y-chromosomal Adam. Where Y-chromosomal Adam resided has not yet been established. But as they describe this week in Nature, a group of researchers led by Vanessa Hayes of the Garvan Institute in Sydney, Australia, think they have found out where Mitochondrial Eve came from. West of NodThat northern Botswana was an important habitat for early humans has been known for years. Makgadikgadi is littered with stone tools dropped there aeons ago by Palaeolithic hominids. Which species of hominids, though, is not necessarily clear. Unlike later artefacts, Palaeolithic tools are not species specific. Though invented about 1.8m years ago by Homo erectus, an early species of human that spread over Africa and Asia, they were also used by erectus’s numerous daughter species, one line of which leads eventually to Homo sapiens. The story that Dr Hayes and her colleagues are proposing is that, whoever might have been living there beforehand, by 200,000 years ago the land around Lake Makgadikgadi was occupied by Homo sapiens. For the following 70,000 years these people evolved in isolation, penned into their homeland by desertlike surroundings. Then, in two bursts—one 130,000 years ago and the other 110,000 years ago—they were unleashed on the wider world. The human mitogenic tree split early into two branches, known as L0 and L1-6. L0 is largely confined to southern Africa. It is the characteristic mitogenome of the Khoesan people, who long predate the arrival in the area of both Bantu from further north in Africa and Europeans from overseas. Dr Hayes and her colleagues therefore gathered all of the existing versions of L0 that they could find, and also collected 198 new ones, to bring together a total of 1,217 variants from which they sought to construct a definitive ancestral tree. Such trees are made by looking for typos in the sequences of genetic “letters” in genomes—places in the DNA where a single chemical base differs from one individual to another. Because mitogenomes do not recombine during sex, these changes are all the results of random mutations. By comparing genomes, it is possible to work out what order the mutations happened in. Hence the ancestral tree. And because even random processes have measurable averages, it is also possible to estimate when a particular mutation arose. With these two pieces of information and a third—where a sample was collected—maps of how people spread can be constructed. And that is what Dr Hayes and her colleagues did. They first drew up and dated a new L0 tree. The branches of this converge about 200,000 years ago, rather than 150,000, as had previously been believed. And it showed the point of origin to be Makgadikgadi. It also showed that the L0 population had lived in Makgadikgadi and nowhere else (at least, nowhere that has left any modern mitochondrial DNA) for about 70 millennia before some part of it moved south-west, and a further 20 millennia before another part moved north-east. The north-eastern migrants were confirmed as the ancestors of L1-6, and thus of everyone alive today apart from the Khoesan and their kin. The second line of evidence comes from work by Dr Hayes’s collaborator, Axel Timmermann of the Institute for Basic Science in Busan, South Korea. He is a climatologist and has pieced together, from paleogeographic and astronomical evidence, a history of Makgadikgadi and its surroundings. In particular, he has looked at the effects on the climate there of the shifts in Earth’s orbit and axial spin that cause ice ages. His conclusion is that the desert barrier surrounding Makgadikgadi was penetrated twice by green corridors along which animals, people included, would have been able to migrate. The first corridor opened 130,000 years ago to the south-west. The second, 110,000 years ago to the north-east. This matches both the mitogenomic data and the archaeological evidence. The south-western dispersal would have carried the ancestors of today’s L0 individuals into other parts of southern Africa. In particular, it would explain the traces of habitation along South Africa’s coast that date from shortly after this period. It was the north-eastern dispersal, though, that unleashed the children of Makgadikgadi on the wider world. They spread up through what is now Zambia and into east Africa. Eventually, they crossed into Asia, and thence to Australia, Europe and the Americas. As is often the case in science, there are still a few loose ends to tie up. One is where in Africa Y-chromosomal Adam lived, a fact for which evidence is sparse. A second, related question is how much miscegenation with pre-existing hominids the migrants from Makgadikgadi indulged in as they spread and multiplied. It is known, from the DNA of people alive today, that Homo sapiens bred with Neanderthals in Europe and Denisovans in Asia, and it is also known from fossils that Homo sapiens existed elsewhere in Africa besides Makgadikgadi at the time Dr Hayes is describing. So it is a racing certainty that the Makgadikgadians acquired DNA from other groups as they migrated. It is nevertheless tempting to think—especially given that 70,000-year period of isolation, during which unique characteristics could have evolved without being diluted by outside genes—that what eventually walked out of that giant wetland was indeed something world-conqueringly special.