LOOSELY ADAPTED from “Caging Skies”, Christine Leunens’s acclaimed novel, “Jojo Rabbit” tells the story of a boy in the Hitler Youth in the last months of the second world war. It may seem to be a departure for Taika Waititi, a writer-director whose elaborately silly and colourful comedies usually concern house-sharing vampires (“What We Do In The Shadows”) and interstellar superheroes (“Thor: Ragnorok”). But “Jojo Rabbit” is just as farcical—and just as funny—as Mr Waititi’s other films. It may even be sweeter, warmer and more suitable for children, which, considering the horrors associated with its subject matter, is quite an achievement. A New Zealander who identifies as Polynesian Jewish, Mr Waititi has not just written and directed the film; he also co-stars as Adolf Hitler—or rather Adolf Hitler as envisioned by the ten-year-old Johannes “Jojo” Betzler (Roman Griffin Davis). Materialising every now and then to give Jojo amusingly useless pep talks, this incarnation of the Führer is a sulky ignoramus who faints at the sight of blood and runs away at the first sign of trouble. Like the rest of the film’s Nazi characters, he also sounds suspiciously like a 21st-century hipster: Mr Waititi never does such characters the honour of taking them seriously. But as dim-witted as this Hitler obviously is, Jojo is naive enough to believe that his imaginary friend is the mighty leader of the master race.  Indeed, the boy is just as enthusiastic about Nazi dogma as the next generation of children would be about the Beatles, a comparison the film makes by having a German-language rendition of “I Wanna Hold Your Hand” over the opening credits. His devotion does not waver until one day he hears mysterious noises in his house, and discovers that his loving single mother (Scarlett Johansson) has hidden a teenage Jewish refugee named Elsa (Thomasin McKenzie) in a crawl space behind a bedroom wall. Both Jojo and his pal are flummoxed. He knows that if he informs the authorities his mother will be imprisoned, or worse, so he carries on with his Hitler Youth chores, as instructed by a jaded captain (Sam Rockwell). But every evening, after he has finished pasting up propaganda posters and collecting scrap metal around his picturesque home town, he chats to the confident and intelligent Elsa. Soon he comes to suspect that she might not be all that bad after all. “Jojo Rabbit” is being marketed as an “anti-hate satire”, but this is misleading. Hatred does not really feature in the story in any meaningful way, and the spoofing of Nazi ideology is hardly stealthy or subtle enough to qualify as satire. To be more accurate, the film is a big-hearted comedy-drama that contrasts the idiocy and incompetence of bigoted fanatics with the nobility and kindness of their opponents. The emphasis on the innate buffoonery of extremists recalls Armando Iannucci’s “The Death of Stalin”, but without that film’s brutality. And when Stephen Merchant cameos as a slimy Gestapo officer, the knockabout humour suggests that Mr Waititi might well have watched the British second-world-war sitcom “’Allo ’Allo!”. Perhaps “Jojo Rabbit” is too reassuring. A braver film might have had Jojo being gripped more tightly by Nazism, whereas here his Hitler Youth membership is treated as a gullible youngster’s laughably misguided hobby. Then again, it is brave in a different way in that it is so optimistic. The upbeat message that friendship can conquer prejudice is one audiences need to hear sometimes. “Jojo Rabbit” was released in America on October 18th and will appear in Britain on January 3rd