FOR YOUR average African strongman, constitutions can be a bore. They usually require you to tolerate opposition parties and pay lip service to human rights. Worse, they often restrict how long you can stay in power. Fortunately for aspiring autocrats, they can be subverted. Since 2002, 11 African leaders have bulldozed through constitutional niceties to remain in office beyond their sell-by dates. Guinea’s president, Alpha Condé, is hoping to become the 12th. It is little surprise that thousands of Guineans have taken to the streets to protest. Mr Condé should be stepping down next year, having served two five-year terms, the constitutional limit. But he hints that he would like to stay on. Doing so will not be easy. West Africa takes term limits more seriously than do other parts of the continent. The region’s 15-member bloc, the Economic Community of West African States, has a record of bringing miscreants into line. Five leaders in the region have tried to overstay their welcome in recent years. Only one—the late Gnassingbé Eyadéma of Togo—succeeded in 2002.  Guinea’s constitution, adopted in 2010, is watertight. Its drafters, having lived under a succession of woeful autocrats, sensed that future leaders might be reluctant to retire gracefully. So they added a clause making it impossible to remove term limits without ditching the entire constitution. Undeterred, Mr Condé asked his government last month to look into doing just that. The constitution, he suggested, was no good since it did not address women’s rights, environmental protection and cyber-crime (never mind that such issues could be tackled through ordinary laws). In order to win assent for a new one, he has stacked the courts and delayed legislative elections by nearly a year (to protect his party’s narrow majority, claims the opposition). A referendum will be needed, but Guinea has a history of bogus votes. Many Guineans are not thrilled by the prospect of Mr Condé staying on. During street protests last week, the security forces killed at least nine people. Opposition parties, civil-society groups and trade unions have banded together to form the National Front for the Defence of the Constitution. Western donors have privately shared their misgivings with the president. Mr Condé, though, seems unfazed, perhaps because he has the backing of an implacable opponent of the West: Russia. At the beginning of this year Russia’s then-ambassador to Guinea, Alexander Bregadze, openly backed Mr Condé’s power grab. Reflecting a curiously Russian view of things, Mr Bregadze told Guineans that they should not view the constitution as “dogma”. Besides, why would anyone want to see the back of someone as “legendary” as Mr Condé? “Do you know of many presidents in Africa who do better?” he asked. Yes, say many Guineans. Their country is plagued by corruption and has a GDP per person of $885, a little over half the average for sub-Saharan Africa. The endorsement by Mr Bregadze is in keeping with Russia’s growing assertiveness in Africa, where it is looking to forge deeper economic, military and political ties. As America pulls back from the continent, President Vladimir Putin (no stranger to constitutional chicanery) sees opportunities to enhance Russia’s clout. It is already the largest arms exporter to the continent. This week Mr Putin will schmooze dozens of African leaders in the Black Sea resort of Sochi. Among other things, the first Russia-Africa summit will give Russia’s state-backed oligarchs a chance to stake a wider claim to Africa’s mineral wealth. Guinea is an alluring target. It has the world’s largest reserves of bauxite, from which aluminium is extracted. Rusal, a Russian firm that is the largest producer of aluminium outside China, obtains 27% of its bauxite from Guinea. America imposed sanctions on Rusal last year, threatening its global supply chain. Those have since been lifted (sanctions on Oleg Deripaska, Rusal’s co-owner, remain in place), but the ordeal highlighted the importance of strengthening Mr Condé should the West seek to put pressure on Guinea to cut ties with Russia. In May Mr Bregadze traded in his ambassadorship to become head of Rusal’s operations in Guinea. Western diplomats have also received unconfirmed reports that Yevgeny Prigozhin, a crony of Mr Putin, has set up a branch of his shadowy business empire in Guinea. Mr Prigozhin’s alleged interests run from mining and mercenaries to internet troll farms. He has been indicted in America for engaging in “information warfare” aimed at tilting the last presidential election in favour of Donald Trump, which he denies. He has also been linked to the Wagner Group, a private security firm that has deployed mercenaries in Ukraine and Syria. Wagner has also been active in Africa, providing protection for President Faustin-Archange Touadéra of the Central African Republic and allegedly sending spin doctors to influence elections in Madagascar, Zimbabwe and elsewhere. Russia’s strategy in Guinea is not without risks. In cosseting Mr Condé it has alienated the opposition. Last week protesters attempted to tear up Rusal’s bauxite-transporting railway line. Mr Condé has banned protests, used force on demonstrators and locked up opposition leaders. He hints—not always implausibly—that his opponents harbour a hidden Islamist agenda. And he exploits ethnic divisions. That still may not be enough to keep him power. When Blaise Compaoré, the president of Burkina Faso, tried to abolish term limits in 2014 his people rose up and turfed him out. But he did not have such a powerful ally at his side. (Image credit: AFP)