IN MAY, Justice Stephen Breyer sounded a warning. Dissenting from a decision that upended a 40-year-old rule involving out-of-state lawsuits, Justice Breyer chastised his conservative colleagues for “surrender[ing] to the temptation” of overruling a precedent not because it has proved to be unworkable but simply because five justices happen to disagree with it. “Today’s decision”, he wrote, “can only cause one to wonder which cases the court will overrule next”. Several vulnerable precedents may have been on Justice Breyer’s mind, but his lone citation in the closing paragraph—to Planned Parenthood v Casey, the 1992 case reaffirming Roe v Wade—suggested that his most profound worry involves the future of abortion rights. That concern took on new urgency on October 4th when the Supreme Court announced it would hear its first abortion case since Donald Trump’s two appointees—Justices Neil Gorsuch and Brett Kavanaugh—built a new conservative majority. Mr Trump campaigned on the promise of selecting justices who would “automatically” overrule Roe v Wade, the 1973 ruling that first recognised a right to abortion prior to fetal viability. The new case, June Medical Services v Gee, asks whether Louisiana may require abortion providers to have admitting privileges at a hospital no farther than 30 miles from the abortion facility. This does not tee up a frontal assault on Roe. It heralds, instead, a threat to abortion access that could more subtly whittle away at the right Roe protects.  When the Supreme Court reviews June Medical Services, it will revisist a recent case involving the regulation of abortion clinics: Whole Woman’s Health v Hellerstedt, a 2016 decision striking down a Texas law that, like Louisiana’s, required abortion providers to have admitting privileges at nearby hospitals. The court found that the regulation would have shuttered half of Texas’s 40 abortion clinics, posing “a substantial obstacle to women seeking abortions”, while providing “few, if any, health benefits”. With “nothing” to suggest that Texas’s rules “would have helped even one woman obtain better treatment”, the majority pronounced the regulation an unconstitutional “undue burden” on a woman’s right to choose. The 5-3 decision in Whole Woman’s Health did not deter several states from attempting to enforce similar regulations—known to their detractors as Targeted Regulation of Abortion Providers, or TRAP, laws. But in 2017, a district-court judge found Louisiana’s law “unconstitutional on its face” under Casey and Whole Woman’s Health. Any “marginal health benefits” the regulation might bring “would be dramatically outweighed by the obstacles the restriction erects to women’s access to their constitutional right to abortion”. A panel of the conservative Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals, by a 2-1 vote, reversed this decision in 2018. Though the requirement in Louisiana was identical to the Texas regulation struck down in Whole Woman’s Health, the impact on women in Louisiana was “dramatically less”, the Fifth Circuit held, and passed constitutional muster. In February, the Supreme Court surprised some observers by blocking Louisiana’s abortion-clinic regulation from taking effect. The vote was 5-4, with Chief Justice John Roberts joining the liberal justices to stay the Fifth Circuit’s ruling. The chief’s defection from his conservative colleagues was significant but not momentous: the decision was procedural and temporary. Chief Justice Roberts has otherwise been a consistent vote to limit abortion rights, including in Whole Woman’s Health, when he joined Justice Samuel Alito’s dissent finding that the plaintiffs’ claims of dramatically reduced abortion access as a result of the regulations were just “crude inferences”. With four justices seemingly ready to overturn Whole Woman’s Health just three years after it was decided and four justices fully committed to the ruling, all eyes are on Chief Justice Roberts. When June Medical Services comes up for argument in early 2020, with a decision expected by the end of June, the chief, and thus the court, could go in a few directions. Chief Justice Roberts could rejoin his conservative brethren, let Louisiana impose the clinic regulations and toss Whole Woman’s Health. He could vote again with the liberals, strike down Louisiana's law and affirm the 2016 precedent. Or, perhaps most likely, he could try to stake out a middle ground that vindicates the Fifth Circuit’s view of the case while only implicitly gutting Whole Woman’s Health. Such a tack would draw on Justice Brett Kavanaugh's characterisation of the case as “intensely factual” in an opinion he penned in February. Roberts and his colleagues could leave Whole Woman Health’s new spin on the “undue burden” standard untouched while claiming that Louisiana’s regulations satisfy it. That claim will be tough to justify: the rules would leave only one functioning abortion clinic in the state, with little to no benefit for women's health. But the chief might see such a nuanced approach as the best course for tamping down passions over America’s most divisive issue—and the politics of the judiciary—just months before voters choose the next president.