PRESIDENT DONALD TRUMP’s approval and disapproval ratings have remained extraordinarily stable over the past three years. Presiding over unprecedented levels of political polarisation, he has displayed an ability to rally his supporters behind almost any policy proposal. His detractors, meanwhile, have remained doggedly opposed to his agenda. Perhaps unsurprisingly, Americans' views on impeachment broadly follow this pattern. If someone supported Mr Trump’s presidency before the Democrats launched an impeachment investigation in September they are likely to oppose efforts to impeach him—and vice-versa.  The Economist’s analysis of political polls reveals that in early September, before news broke that Mr Trump had asked President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine to investigate a political rival in return for military aid, roughly 45% of Americans opposed impeaching Mr Trump and 42% approved of his job as president. That gap closed the following month when Democrats announced they would begin an impeachment inquiry. On October 23rd, 41 % of Americans approved of Mr Trump’s job performance and the same share opposed impeaching him. The share of those Americans who wanted to impeach him grew. In September, 54% of adults disapproved of Mr Trump and 45% supported impeaching him. By late October, the president’s disapproval rating was the same but 50% wanted him out of office. Most of the increase in support for impeaching Mr Trump has come from his detractors. The Economist’s analysis of data from YouGov, a pollster, found that 85% of voters who disapproved of Mr Trump on October 23rd also wanted him impeached—up from 65% in July (see chart). Of the president’s supporters, 6% wanted him impeached (a one-point decrease from July) and 91% wanted him to stay in office (a three-point increase). Pew Research Centre, which interviewed a group of Republicans in September and again in October found that nearly a third of those who pivoted from opposing an impeachment inquiry to approving of it were Republicans. This constitutes less than 3% of the party’s voters. Nine out of every ten Republican voters disapprove of the impeachment inquiry (the same proportion of Democratic voters approve of it.) This extreme partisanship will make it harder to impeach Mr Trump. During the Watergate scandal, congressional Republicans who had once defended Richard Nixon turned equally strongly against him. He resigned when it became clear that members of his own party would vote against him in a Senate trial. But the current depths of partisanship, which reflect a wider polarisation between voters, are unprecedented in recent times. Because the power to remove Mr Trump is vested in the Senate—which is both controlled by Republicans and electorally biased toward them—popular feeling for impeachment will probably have to become a lot stronger for it to become possible.