“MANY PEOPLE are surprised to hear that we have comedians in Russia, but they are there,” Yakov Smirnoff, a Ukrainian-born comedian, said in the 1980s. “They are dead, but they are there!” Mr Smirnoff, who had emigrated from the Soviet Union to America to pursue a career in comedy, became famous for his jokes highlighting differences between his new country and the USSR. Known as the “Russian reversal”, these quips often followed a set format. “In America, you assassinate president,” one popular joke went: “In Soviet Russia, president assassinate you!” The idea that comedy in Russia was heavily controlled by the state was partially true. In 1961 students in Moscow began a show called “KVN”—in Russian, the “Club of the Funny and Inventive”—where teams competed against one another through sketches and banter with the audience. They made a jab too many at Soviet politics, however, because “KVN” was shut down by the authorities in 1972. It reappeared in 1986, and was shown on television amid the perestroika movement and calls for more relaxed attitudes among the Soviet leadership. At the time, it was celebrated as a source of sharp insight.  When the Soviet Union fell, “KVN” (pictured) continued to be shown on Channel One, a state-owned broadcaster, and it has become one of the country’s longest-running programmes. It is also among the most beloved, frequently receiving the highest ratings for its time slot. Yet its willingness to poke fun at the state seems to have been stamped out. In 2017 Dmitry Kolchin, a sketch-writer for the show, claimed in a YouTube video that it was extremely difficult to get any jokes making political or social criticism approved. Resistance came, he said, not from the editors but from the managers of the channel. Another comedian, Sasha Filippenko, has accused “KVN” of devolving into “songs about the great leader”: ie, Vladimir Putin. Stand-up is beginning to gain ground in Russia. TNT, an entertainment channel which had been running a “Comedy Club” television show since the early 2000s, began to air a new stand-up competition in 2017. “It’s kind of a rip off of the American show ‘Last Comic Standing’”, explains Milo Edwards, a British performer who took part after being spotted at a gig in Moscow. Hopeful participants do their bits in front of a panel of producers, with the winners offered the opportunity to develop their material for a slot on TV. “The jokes had to be very superficial,” Mr Edwards says. Political jibes were allowed, so long as they were used sparingly and relied heavily on subtext. Jovial references to swearing, narcotics or homosexuality were verboten. In a twist on Mr Smirnoff’s “Russian reversal” jokes, if Mr Edwards planned to make a comment criticising Russia, he was told to say something bad about other countries, too. TNT’s approach to comedy was still mindful of the authorities. “Most of the people [involved] were fairly liberal, but also working in a system which was entirely dependent on the goodwill of the government,” Mr Edwards says. That goodwill is not something the channel can afford to take lightly: TNT is owned by Gazprom Media, a subsidiary of Gazprom, a state-controlled energy giant. Mr Edwards, who has now returned to performing in Britain, argues that the fear of pushing boundaries may well stem from television producers’ desire to give the audience what they think they’ll like. “I think, with the benefit of hindsight, they were just very cognisant of what was acceptable to a Russian TV audience,” he says. “People’s tastes are entirely educated by what they’ve seen before.” Some comics and audiences, though, are growing impatient with conservative, tried-and-tested formulas. Live shows often cover more controversial subjects, and some advertise themselves as featuring material “you won’t find on television”. Stand Up #1, a comedy club in Moscow, airs all its live shows on YouTube. This has made it a mecca for comedians such as Alexander Dolgopolov, whose material focuses heavily on politics; Mr Dolgopolov has earned many young fans online. Comedy clubs have not yet been subject to the unexpected shutdowns and intimidation seen at concerts for rappers and alternative musicians. But comedy needs freedom of speech to flourish, and Russia remains a country where dissidents can be locked up. That, for many, is no laughing matter.