IN THE 350 years since his death in 1669, Rembrandt van Rijn has been reinterpreted time and again. The Victorians considered him a reclusive genius. Critics in the mid-20th century thought he was a misunderstood experimentalist. In the 1980s there was a fashion for seeing him as a brilliant businessman. More recently, he has been depicted as an empath, the supreme explorer of human emotion in paint. The present anniversary has occasioned another flurry of characterisations, accompanied by something resembling an art-historical game of Go Fish: a shuffling and reshuffling of canvases in which institutions have sought the works they need in order to justify their desired Rembrandt, loaned the ones they could do without, or made the best of what they already have. In “Rembrandt’s Light”, a show at the Dulwich Picture Gallery in London, every work is presented with a fragment of cod screenplay, and every room has its own lighting design courtesy of a cinematographer who worked on “Star Wars”. Notes inform the visitor when the mood in the artworks turns, for instance, “meditative”, then “erotic”. This is Rembrandt as cinematographer manqué, and it says less about the works on show than it does about the current enthusiasm for immersive experiences. Rembrandt’s interest in the staging of a dramatic scene certainly had an influence on Hollywood: Lee Garmes, a pioneering cinematographer, was inspired by Rembrandt to create his famous “north lighting” effect, while Cecil B. DeMille marketed his cinematic chiaroscuro as “Rembrandt lighting”. But that is proof of Hollywood borrowing from Rembrandt, not Rembrandt somehow anticipating Hollywood.  Curators seeking to shore up their characterisations of the artist have often done so by hanging him alongside other painters. Put Rembrandt alongside Caravaggio and he looks like a realist, alongside Auerbach and he looks almost expressionistic. In the Rijksmusem’s “Rembrandt-Velázquez” exhibition, pieces by Spanish and Dutch masters have been hung in pairs that reveal new ideas and interpretations. (Though Rembrandt’s superior technical skill is hard to ignore.) In these strange and turbulent times, it seems that the organisers could not help but show off Rembrandt’s comic sensibilities. The effect of pairing “Self Portrait as the Apostle Paul”—from which Rembrandt gazes out in exhausted forbearance—with Velázquez’s portrait of a Court bufón, scholarly and self-possessed, is humorous. Velázquez understands the dignity of a comedian, while Rembrandt demonstrates the comedy of dignitaries. It is an insight that reaches its raucous climax in the Rijksmuseum’s prize Rembrandt, “The Night Watch”, which is currently undergoing the first stage of a public restoration. The painting depicts an Amsterdam militia company, the men’s gazes shooting off like misfired bullets, their gestures obscuring each other’s faces. The uniforms are mismatched, some a century older than others. The Rembrandt who painted it is an artist of political disorder—undoubtedly a Rembrandt that resonates in 2019. Like many of his contemporaries, Rembrandt developed most of his ideas on canvas rather than in preliminary sketches; he was a slow painter, endlessly reworking the same surface. In theory, then, projects such as the scanning of “The Night Watch” could find evidence to help modern-day critics sift through the many versions of Rembrandt, and identify which are truest to how the painter saw himself. The Rembrandt House Museum’s exhibition, “Rembrandt Laboratory”, gives a survey of the technology used by researchers and the results as they stand. A few of the findings have interpretive ramifications: an analysis showing that some of Rembrandt’s browns and yellows were once bright blues and greens calls into question some of the moodier characterisations of the man and his work. (Other discoveries are bathetic. The red cap in “The Man in the Red Cap”, it turns out, was once a bit smaller.) But, while these initial discoveries have been illuminating, they do not pin his oeuvre down. That is no bad thing. The range of Rembrandt’s subject matter and the prodigiousness of his talents have endowed his paintings with more meanings than he could have foreseen. What all these exhibitions are really celebrating on the 350th anniversary of the artist’s death is that he is provided so much worth seeing.