IN THE EARLY 1970s Nam June Paik won a Rockefeller Foundation fellowship with a proposal “to destroy national television”. The award gave him the resources to make “Global Groove” (1973), a joyous East-meets-West video montage including Beethoven’s “Moonlight Sonata” and a Japanese Pepsi commercial. At Tate Modern it plays in a darkened room on 40 old cathode-ray-tube TV sets nestled among tropical plants. It makes the perfect introduction to the work of the uniquely energetic and eclectic Korean-American artist, who died in 2006. Born in 1932 in Japanese-occupied Korea, Paik is rightly described as the father of video art. He studied music in Tokyo before heading for Germany in 1956. There he attended lectures by John Cage, a composer and music theorist, whose incorporation of chance and silence into his arrangements and performances profoundly influenced the young artist.  Influenced too by Dadaism, an artistic movement which emerged during the first world war, Paik embarked on a similarly subversive series of performances. He smashed violins and challenged audience members to play a piano cluttered with objects—ranging from eggshells to toy trucks—and bound in barbed wire. For his first solo show, in a villa in Wuppertal in 1963, he suspended a freshly slaughtered ox’s head over the entrance (the police soon removed it). He placed work throughout the house, including in the bath, and gave visitors tools to compose their own music. What fascinated Paik most, though, was television; he had been exploring the artistic possibilities of the medium since the early 1960s. “I knew there was something to be done in television and nobody was doing it,” he later reflected. “So I said, ‘why not make it my job?’” Paik believed in the idea of the “global village” and wanted artists to help develop a more democratic mass media. Throughout his life Paik moved between Japan, Germany and America, returning to Korea for the first time in the 1980s. Starting with Cage (who deepened his understanding of Buddhism), his friends were also his collaborators. A key partnership was with Charlotte Moorman, a classically trained cellist based in New York, who often surprised audiences by taking her clothes off. “TV Cello” (1971), a playable cello built from three vertically stacked TV monitors running film of Moorman, is one of Paik’s cleverest sculptural works. Another close collaborator was Joseph Beuys, a German artist and self-styled shaman. The pair shared a desire to unite Europe and Asia, mankind and nature, the scientific and the spiritual in their work. “The one good fortune in my life was that I got to know John Cage when he was considered more a gadfly than a guru and Joseph Beuys when he was still an eccentric hermit in Dusseldorf,” Paik once said. On New Year’s Day 1984 Paik returned to broadcasting with a riposte to the dystopian vision of George Orwell’s novel. A hectic mishmash of live cultural events in New York and Paris, “Good Morning, Mr. Orwell” was broadcast in America, West Germany, Korea and the Netherlands. Paik followed it in 1986 with the even more ambitious “Bye Bye Kipling” (pictured below), which challenged Rudyard Kipling’s assertion that “East is East, and West is West, and never the twain shall meet” by linking New York, Seoul and Tokyo during the Asian Games. Knitted together with dizzying special effects were Lou Reed, Issey Miyake, Philip Glass, kabuki theatre and a marathon runner in Seoul. “Global Groove” had begun with the words: “This is a glimpse of new world when you will be able to switch on every TV channel in the world…” The 1980s works were another step towards that. The Tate show ends with the riotous “Sistine Chapel”, a re-creation of Paik’s work at the Venice Biennale of 1993, where he had shared the German pavilion (and a Golden Lion award) with Hans Haacke. Paik filled the building’s wings with a thumping rock soundtrack and deliberately misaligned moving images; he highlighted Venice’s connection with Mongolia via the travels of Marco Polo. It was the era when video art truly took off. Paik had already been doing it for 30 years. “Nam June Paik: The Future Is Now” continues at Tate Modern until February 9th