DECISION DAY became dither day. Rather than hold the expected “meaningful vote” on Boris Johnson’s proposed Brexit deal, on October 19th Britain’s House of Commons—sitting on a Saturday for the first time in 37 years—instead chose to wait a while. By 322 votes to 306, MPs backed an amendment proposed by Sir Oliver Letwin, an ex-Tory grandee, to “withhold” approval of the agreement until Parliament has passed the legislation needed to implement it. Sir Oliver intended his amendment as insurance against the possibility of Britain leaving the European Union without a deal on October 31st. According to the Benn act, the prime minister is now obliged to send a letter to the EU by 11pm asking for another extension. But Sir Oliver’s insurance policy has also blown Mr Johnson’s political strategy to smithereens. Mr Johnson had two powerful weapons to help his bid to cobble together an alliance to win a meaningful vote, stretching from hard-line Eurosceptics to Labour MPs in Leave-voting districts. These were momentum and fear of a no-deal Brexit. The Northern Irish Democratic Unionist Party’s refusal to support it was a blow. So was the Labour Party’s use of thumbscrews on its wavering MPs. John Lansman, a prominent left-wing activist, threatened that Labour’s National Executive Committee would replace those voting for Mr Johnson’s deal with “new socialist MPs”. Nevertheless, early on October 19th it looked as if Mr Johnson was within two or three votes of the 320 he needed. The desire in the country at large just to get Brexit done was palpable.  Sir Oliver’s amendment has not only destroyed this all-important momentum. It has also raised the hurdle over which the government has to jump. The amendment stops Parliament from voting on Mr Johnson’s deal until it has examined the legislation in detail. It potentially gives select committees a chance to do their nit-picking work. More important, it shifts the nature of the discussion from what is right with the bill to what it wrong with it. Before Saturday’s dramatic events Tony Blair had warned: “You don’t take a decision of destiny through a spasm of impatience”. The danger, for Brexiteers, is that you never take a decision of destiny without impatience. Mr Johnson responded to defeat with his characteristic bluster. He promised that he would bring the necessary legislation forward for a vote on October 22nd. This would allow him to revive his my-way-or-the-highway strategy, replacing Super Saturday with Super Tuesday. He insisted that he would not send the extension letter to the EU as required by law. He also repeated his promise that Britain would leave the EU on October 31st. It’s hard to see how any of this can work. Turning his hastily concocted deal into robust legislation will be a monumental task. The Benn act is legally watertight (Mr Johnson himself claimed in evidence to a Scottish court that he would send the necessary letter). The shift in mood from optimism to gloom on the government’s side on Saturday was palpable. Sir Oliver kindly said that, with his insurance against no-deal in place, he would campaign wholeheartedly for Mr Johnson’s deal and departure from the EU on October 31st. This was cold comfort for a prime minister who that morning had been poised to achieve something remarkable. Where does this leave British politics? The simple answer is: as stuck as ever. The government has brought two different exit deals before the House of Commons in the past couple of years. Theresa May’s was defeated three times; now Mr Johnson’s has been thwarted. (In a speech supporting Mr Johnson, Mrs May confessed to “a distinct sense of déjà vu”.) Opinion in the Commons seems too fragmented for agreement on a deal with the current configuration of MPs. Parliamentary procedure provides too many levers for cunning MPs to use against the government. Ironically, the people with the most power to free Britain from this limbo are based in Brussels rather than London. EU leaders could simply refuse to offer an extension and force Westminster to choose. That is unlikely: though Jean-Claude Juncker, the president of the European Commission, and Emmanuel Macron, the president of France, played along with Mr Johnson’s “my deal or no deal” line, the EU has no desire to see Britain crash out without a deal. An extension will be forthcoming. Today’s debacle makes an election before Christmas more likely. The various opposition parties may be tempted to bring forward a vote of no confidence in the government and give Mr Johnson the public poll that he so desperately wants. What follows could be one of the most divisive elections in years. Mr Johnson will claim to be running against a hoity-toity political establishment that is determined to deny the people the Brexit they voted for. If he gains a majority, he should have the votes he needs to pass his Brexit deal. At the same time the debacle also raises the chances of a second referendum. The Labour Party has moved more decisively into the second-referendum camp and the number of MPs who think that another plebiscite is the only way to get Britain out of its current paralysis has increased. It was perhaps fitting that, while MPs debated, about a million pro-Remain protesters marched on Parliament Square, many of them festooned with EU flags that, until the Brexit referendum, were almost never seen on these shores.