SINCE IT WAS first reported a week ago that President Donald Trump had urged his Ukrainian counterpart, Volodymyr Zelensky, to investigate the family of Joe Biden, a front-runner for the Democratic presidential nomination, speculation has been rife about what fresh revelations might follow. After a phone conversation between the two men on July 25th, White House aides stored a record of the call in a computer system usually reserved for national-security secrets. What other conversations between Mr Trump and world leaders, observers wondered, might have been buried? They may now have some idea. First, it was reported that Mr Trump’s conversations with Vladimir Putin, the president of Russia, and Muhammad bin Salman, the crown prince of Saudi Arabia, were stored in the system. On September 30th the New York Times reported that the White House had also curtailed access to the transcript of a telephone call in which Mr Trump asked Scott Morrison, the prime minister of Australia, to help William Barr, the attorney-general, investigate the investigators of his campaign’s connections with Russia during the last presidential election campaign. On October 1st Australia confirmed that such a conversation had taken place. Mr Trump may have had in mind an unsubstantiated theory that George Papadopoulos, a former campaign aide who triggered the Russia investigation by talking to an Australian diplomat at a bar in London, was the target of a set-up by domestic agencies. The overture to Australia appears to be part of a wide-ranging personal effort by Mr Barr to obtain foreign help in investigating America’s own intelligence agencies.  The spectacle of a president trying to discredit domestic intelligence agencies is unseemly. But it may not be on the same scale as the Ukrainian affair. A week before his conversation with Mr Zelensky, Mr Trump had frozen $400m in military assistance to Ukraine, suggesting that he had adjusted foreign policy for his own political benefit. The latest revelations do not, however, augur well for the credibility of Mr Barr, whom Democrats already consider more a presidential consigliere than an impartial official thanks to his partisan handling of the Russia investigation. His department’s decision to not pursue the allegations detailed in the whistleblower complaint that set off the controversy, even after the intelligence community inspector general judged the complaint credible and urgent, is also under scrutiny. Mr Trump, meanwhile, continues to enjoy the support of most Republicans in Congress, even while public-opinion polls suggest a substantial increase in the share of Americans who think Mr Trump ought to be impeached. A recent poll by Reuters found an eight percentage-point increase in the share of Americans supporting impeachment in a single week—from 37% to 45%. That support comprises 74% of Democrats, 37% of independents and 13% of Republicans. As with the Russia investigation, there seems to be just enough amiss at this point to warrant further inquiry—but not enough to threaten the support of congressional Republicans. That suggests that the protracted spectacle of impeachment will hang over Mr Trump’s re-election campaign. The issue of foreign interference in 2016 will continue to be debated, even as the worries about interference in the next election worsen. All of which portends an even more turbulent and dispiriting election than the last one.