FOR EVIDENCE OF how twitchy Democrats remain about finding a presidential candidate who can beat Donald Trump, consider the fuss that has blown up over Tulsi Gabbard. The four-term congresswoman from Hawaii, the first Hindu American to have been elected to the House of Representatives, is an Iraq war veteran who at times has been described as a rising figure in the party. But this year, competing in a crowded field of aspirants to become the Democratic nominee, she has appeared to be little more than a minor also-ran destined to be knocked out early. On a host of measures Ms Gabbard looks weak. She averages just 1% in national polls; gamblers on online betting sites give her a 2% chance of becoming the nominee. Eleven Democrats raised more from donors than she managed in the third quarter. She failed to qualify for the third Democratic debate in September and looks unlikely to join the fifth in November. In the three televised debates she did attend, she spoke relatively little. Her most distinctive policy is her opposition to American involvement in what she calls “regime change wars”. But she is widely portrayed as an apologist for America’s enemies and has had to deny she is a “Russian asset”. The thing for which she is best-known—meeting Syria’s dictator Bashar al-Assad in 2017; she has spoken up for the war-criminal since—is unlikely to charm many voters.  So the fact Ms Gabbard has earned a rush of attention in the past few days, mostly thanks to Hillary Clinton, is good news for the congresswoman. Mrs Clinton, evidently speaking about Ms Gabbard, warned earlier this month that Republicans are “grooming” a current Democratic primary candidate to run as a third-party spoiler in 2020. She added that Russia, by spending on social media operations and more, would be delighted to support such a candidate, if that helped keep Mr Trump in office. In that context, she also attacked the Green Party candidate in 2016, Jill Stein, calling her “totally” a Russian asset. In effect she tried blaming the environmentalist for her own loss to Mr Trump. That has sparked a row that has played to the advantage of Ms Gabbard—who is delighted to pose as a foil against “establishment” Democrats embodied by Mrs Clinton. In the 2016 primaries Ms Gabbard backed Bernie Sanders, a leftist outsider. The congresswoman has emphasized sharp divisions that persist among Democrats, responding to Mrs Clinton by calling her the “queen of warmongers, embodiment of corruption”. She appeared on Fox news and criticised the way Democrats were conducting their impeachment inquiry. All of that will please Republicans. Ms Gabbard has also said that she won’t run for Congress in 2020, so she can focus on her presidential bid. Some see that as further evidence she is open to a third-party run next year. Ms Gabbard has emphatically said she is not interested in one. But politicians can change their minds. And she does at least appear open to striking up close relationships with some overseas partners. After presenting herself as a proud Hindu early in her political career, she forged tight ties with ruling Hindu nationalist politicians in India. She is proud of donating her most prized personal possession—a copy of the Bhagavad Gita—to the prime minister, Narendra Modi, on whom she has lavished praise. And among her most enthusiastic donors since the start of her political career have been members of Hindu nationalist movement in America, several with close ties to India’s ruling party. But it is hard to see why any self-confident Democrat would consider Ms Gabbard a serious threat. Third-party candidates don’t necessarily hurt Democrats more than they hurt Republicans. The idea that Ms Stein’s Green votes really cost the Democrats victory in 2016 does not quite stand up. It is true that Mr Trump won the swing Midwestern states of Michigan, Pennsylvania and Wisconsin by a margin narrower than the Green votes cast in those states. But it is wrong to assume—as some commentators have—that those Green voters would all, otherwise, have backed the Democrat. The biggest problem in such states for Democrats was how many of their traditional supporters stayed home (or plumped for Mr Trump) rather than vote for Mrs Clinton, whom they saw as a flawed candidate. It was low turnout for Democrats, not the appeal of independents, that cost the Democrats the Midwestern states. What may be more important about the spat, therefore, is the way it illuminates divisions among the Democrats. Voters on the left of the party might stay home if they feel party leaders unfairly shut down dissenting voices, such as Ms Gabbard’s, just as some felt Mr Sanders was unfairly treated in 2016. The big test for Democrats is to find a way to settle on a candidate without upsetting a wing of the party. If party supporters remain focused on opposing Mr Trump that will be easier. The more Democrats reopen squabbles from the past, or issue warnings about third-party challengers, the more likely resentments are to fester.