Britain looks set for an election in December. After weeks of dithering the main opposition Labour Party has said it will support repeated calls by Boris Johnson, the prime minister, for an early general election to be held in December.  Mr Johnson says an election is needed to “get Brexit done”, after his pledge to leave the European Union by October 31st, “do or die”, was killed off by Parliament. He also lost three attempts to call an early election because Labour’s abstention denied him the two-thirds majority needed under the Fixed-term Parliaments Act. However, on October 29th Labour’s leader, Jeremy Corbyn, announced that his main objection to an election, namely that a “no-deal” Brexit be off the table, had at last been met after the EU agreed to extend the deadline for Britain’s departure to January 31st 2020. In large part, however, Labour was wrong-footed by other opposition parties—the Liberal Democrats and the Scottish National Party—who unexpectedly declared that they would support an early election if the government set aside its EU withdrawal bill. The government agreed to do so, setting the stage for Parliament to vote on an election date under a different procedure requiring only a simple majority of MPs. Mr Johnson favours December 12th; the Liberal Democrats and SNP prefer December 9th. One reason for the Conservatives’ desire for an election, and Labour’s wariness of it, is plain from opinion polls that give the Tories a large advantage. Our poll tracker, which averages the findings of more than a dozen pollsters*, shows how the parties are faring. It will be kept updated throughout the campaign. However, it should be read with caution. It gives an indication of public sentiment, but does not forecast the distribution of seats. The election is particularly hard to predict, for two reasons. First, Britain’s electoral landscape has changed markedly. The country has become polarised into Leave and Remain camps. And the old two-party system has fragmented into more of a four-party configuration; in addition to the Conservatives and Labour, the strongly pro-remain Liberal Democrats and the avidly pro-Leave Brexit party both poll in double figures. Moreover, Scottish and Welsh nationalists have drawn much support in traditional Labour strongholds. A second factor is that, under Britain’s first-past-the-post electoral system, voters are increasingly likely to vote tactically: switching parties to maximise support for the strongest Leave or Remain candidates. * The Economist’s poll-of-polls aggregates data from several firms using a statistical method called a generalised additive mixed model with smoothing. The model corrects for some pollsters’ tendency to consistently over- or under-estimate support for particular parties and reacts quickly to new data that reflects true changes in public opinion, while still treating individual outlier polls with caution. Source: POLITICO Poll of Polls