CHINA HAS held many large military parades, but few as grand or cutting-edge as the display on October 1st marking 70 years of Communist rule. Fifteen thousand troops marched through central Beijing, accompanied by 580 pieces of weaponry and more than 160 aircraft. Antoine Bondaz and Stéphane Delory of the Foundation for Strategic Research, a French think-tank, call the flaunting of firepower on this scale “unprecedented” in China. The Chinese defence ministry said the launch in Shanghai on September 25th of a massive new kind of amphibious warship helped to create a “festive atmosphere” for the country’s national-day celebrations. But it was the missiles that were driven past China’s president, Xi Jinping, at the parade in the capital that played the starring role. By some counts, China displayed one-third of all of the intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs) in its inventory.  The most notable of these, the DF-41, was saved for last. It had never been seen in public previously. Its estimated range of 12,000-15,000km would probably make it China’s first road-mobile missile (ie, one less vulnerable to pre-emptive strikes) that could hit targets anywhere in America, rather than just the west coast. It could carry a large number of decoys or (it is rumoured) up to ten warheads—each capable of manoeuvring independently after re-entering the atmosphere. The missile’s predecessor, the DF-31, can only carry about three. The parade also highlighted China’s ability to strike from the sea by showing off the JL-2 for the first time outside of tests. This intercontinental missile can be launched from China’s new Jin-class nuclear submarines, of which China has put six into service over the past four years. Each sub can carry a dozen of the missiles. But the JL-2 does not have the range of the DF-41. It could “at best attack Seattle” says Owen Cote of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. The noisy Jin-class subs would struggle to range beyond the Yellow Sea without being detected by America, he says. China is developing new missiles and subs to remedy these deficiencies. There were more exotic projectiles on display, too. China provided a tantalising look at the DF-17, a wedge-shaped hypersonic glider that would be boosted and released from a traditional missile. China, America and Russia are all competing to develop such gliders, which would fly at the atmosphere’s outer edge at over five times the speed of sound. Whereas ballistic missiles loop up and down in predictable arcs, gliders can fly at lower heights and in more unpredictable ways, making them harder to intercept. In April 2018 Michael Griffin, the Pentagon’s research and development chief, said that if China had not already fielded such gliders, it was close to doing so. “We do not have defences against those systems,” he added. China also exhibited two new drones, the supersonic WZ-8 and the sleek and stealthy Sharp Sword. Both of these could be used to spot faraway targets for hypersonic and other missiles, point out Mr Bondaz and Mr Delory. For many years, America paid little attention to China’s modest nuclear forces, focusing largely on Russia. That is changing as China builds farther-flying and nimbler missiles that are harder to spot before launch and pose a more serious risk to American soil. China’s stockpile of nukes remains small—under 300 warheads, compared with America’s 4,000. But the head of America’s Defence Intelligence Agency warned in May that China’s nuclear arsenal was expected to double in size over the next decade. Amid an economic slowdown and revolt in Hong Kong, such muscle-flexing may help Mr Xi persuade the public that his “great rejuvenation of the Chinese nation” is still on track. It certainly sends a clear message that China is already a power to be reckoned with.