Purtroppo, la nostra macchinetta è guasta (“Unfortunately, our little machine is broken”) should feature in Italian phrase books, for it is an expression every shopper in Italy encounters before long. Accompanied by a glance at a supposedly sickly payment terminal, it tells the customer proffering a card that only cash will do. Measures in Italy’s draft 2020 budget, sent to the European Commission for scrutiny on October 16th, aim to thwart this and other methods of avoiding the traceability—and taxability—of transactions. One would lower the limit for cash payments from €3,000 ($3,300) to €2,000. Another would create a lottery with prizes restricted to credit- and debit-card users.  The effectiveness of such provisions is key to the credibility of the new government’s first budget. Giuseppe Conte’s left-populist coalition inherited an almost impossible challenge. On the one hand, it had to assuage an electorate primed by the previous government, including the hard-right Northern League, to expect drastic tax cuts and other goodies. On the other, it needed to find €23bn of extra revenue and spending cuts to avoid increasing VAT under a deal struck with the commission to contain the budget deficit. All this against a background of strained relations between the coalition partners: the anti-establishment Five Star Movement, the centre-left Democratic Party (PD) and the more left-wing Free and Equal movement. Relations have become even more difficult to manage since a former prime minister, Matteo Renzi, split from the PD to form the nucleus of a fourth coalition party, Italia Viva. Last month the government disclosed that it intends to let the budget deficit run at 2.2% of GDP next year, compared to a previously planned 2.1%. To offset the VAT increase and fund limited tax cuts and spending increases, the government plans a range of new measures including a “web tax” on digital companies that aims to raise €600m next year. But it will still need €3bn-4bn from discouraging tax evasion if it is to meet its deficit target. Italian governments have consistently over-estimated the effectiveness of such crackdowns in the past. With Italy’s public debt already expected to reach 135.7% of GDP this year and the government nudging up its deficit forecast, it might be thought the stage was set for mounting concern in the markets and a clash with the commissioners. “I think they will make comments and ask for some changes,” says Giovanni Zanni, NatWest Markets’ chief euro-area economist. “But I don’t think the overall framework of the budget will be strongly opposed.” He notes two ways the climate has changed. After years of monetary support for euro-zone growth and with the European Central Bank’s firepower all but spent, investors and policymakers are increasingly looking to fiscal policy for solutions. Meanwhile, the global bond rally has cut interest rates, and thus the interest payments on Italy’s huge debts. Perhaps, though, the most important consideration for Brussels will be political: too much outside pressure could break Mr Conte’s fragile, fractious but above all moderate coalition and let the League’s belligerently Eurosceptic leader, Matteo Salvini, back into government.