Below is a selection of The Economist's coverage of Brexit since the referendum. The articles were used to produce our film "How is Brexit changing the European Union?”. This post is part of “The Story Behind”, a film series that reveals the processes that shape our video journalism. Britain’s impending departure from the European Union has challenged the country’s democracy, economy and society. But it has also affected the EU itself. Whatever the outcome, Brexit will have a lasting impact. How did we get here, exactly? And what happens next?  Economic uncertainty Brexit’s economic impact has been difficult to quantify. Forecasters’ conclusions have varied widely (see chart). Over the past three years, The Economist has covered the many ways in which Brexit may shape the British, European and global economies. Uncertainty about Brexit is hampering business investment in Britain - The Economist, October 8th 2019 What would a no-deal Brexit mean for the economy and financial markets? - The Economist, February 2019 Why predicting the impact of a no-deal Brexit is so hard - The Economist, July 25th 2019 The chilling economic effects of Brexit uncertainty are intensifying - The Economist, August 15th 2019 Brexit and the City London’s financial prowess is something to behold. It hosts 37% of the world’s currency dealing and 18% of cross-border lending. It is a hub for derivatives, asset management, insurance and investment banks. But Brexit means the world’s biggest international financial centre is facing its toughest test. Can the City survive Brexit? - The Economist, June 27th 2019 London’s reign as the world’s capital of capital is at risk - The Economist, June 29th 2019 Report: Brexit & the City – the impact so far - New Financial, March 2019 EY Financial Services Brexit Tracker - EY, September 19th, 2019 Brexit and the European Union Regardless of when and how Brexit happens, the impact of the 2016 referendum has already been felt on the continent. Sometimes, in unexpected ways. Matt Steinglass, The Economist’s deputy Europe editor, explained how some of the challenges facing the EU—and a few of the myths around it—have their roots in the unique nature and evolution of the union. Watch an extended excerpt from our interview with him below.   Volt wants to become the first pan-EU political party - The Economist, November 3rd 2018 Populists fall short of expectations in the European elections - The Economist, May 26th 2019 Public Opinion Poll: “Please tell me for each statement, whether you tend to agree or disagree? (Our country) could better face the future outside the EU” - The European Commission What’s next? Whatever the outcome, Brexit has wrought a new divide in British society and fractured the foundations of the country’s democracy. How Brexit made Britain a country of Remainers and Leavers - The Economist, June 20th 2019 The Brexit referendum and the British constitution - The Economist, May 30th 2019 As this piece was published, a new Brexit deal was struck between Britain and the EU. But it will still have to be approved by Britain’s House of Commons. On Monday October 21st, The Economist is hosting a Q&A to take audience questions and talk about the latest updates. Watch it on our Youtube channel.