AMERICA’S OPIOID epidemic is raging. In 2018 alone, opioid overdoses killed 47,590 Americans. But a promising remedy may be at hand. This month a federal district judge in Pennsylvania ruled that safe-injection sites—facilities where people can take drugs under the supervision of medical professionals—do not violate federal law. The “crack house statute”, a provision of the 1986 Controlled Substances Act, makes it illegal to maintain a property where illicit drugs are being used. But the judge, Gerald McHugh, found that it does not apply to safe-injection sites. If Safehouse, a non-profit organisation and the defendant in the case, succeeds in opening its proposed site in Philadelphia, the facility would become America’s first such clinic. Giving addicts a place to shoot up without fear of arrest may seem peculiar to many Americans. But in Europe they are common (see map). The first “drug-consumption room” was opened in Bern, the capital of Switzerland, in 1986 at the height of the AIDS epidemic. The aim was to contain open-air drug markets and combat diseases spread by dirty needles. Since then, dozens more have opened across the continent (by 2018, the Netherlands led the way with 31 sites in 25 cities). Most offer clean needles and have medical staff on hand to treat those who have overdosed on heroin with naloxone, which temporarily reduces the drug’s effect on the brain and kick-starts breathing. The best-equipped sites also provide food, showers, clothing, health care, counselling and drug-addiction treatment.  Opponents argue that such facilities give junkies a haven to feed their addiction, and that they contribute to more overdoses. In an op-ed for the New York Times in 2018, Rod Rosenstein, then America’s deputy attorney-general, warned that safe-injection sites would expose more people to harm and destroy the communities such facilities operate in. The evidence suggests otherwise. In 2003 Canada’s first safe-injection site opened in Vancouver. Since then 3.6m people have injected drugs there without any fatal overdoses. After a drug-consumption room was opened in Barcelona, researchers estimated that the number of stray syringes found on the city’s streets fell from 13,000 to 3,000 per month. Philadelphia is not the only American city considering safe-injection sites. Officials in New York, San Francisco and Seattle, among others, are pursuing the idea. Several states are also on board. In 2018 Jerry Brown, then California’s governor, vetoed a bill that would have allowed San Francisco to open a safe-injection site. His successor, Gavin Newsom, has said he is open to the idea. Some American politicians, it seems, are shifting their approach in the “war on drugs” from punishing offenders to reducing harm.