RUGBY FANS from Aberdeen to Osaka were looking forward to one of the most exciting games of the World Cup so far. Japan, the hosts, were ready to take on Scotland in Yokohama City on October 13th to decide which team would progress to the quarter-final stage. Then weather threatened to rain on World Rugby’s party. Typhoon Hagibis, a tropical cyclone bringing winds of over 161km (100 miles) per hour, struck Japan’s south-east coast the day before the match. Three other (less weighty) games were cancelled. Organisers warned that the same might happen to Scotland and Japan. The stakes were high for the teams. Japan, who had energised the competition with a surprise win over Ireland, desperately wanted to reach the final stages on home turf. Scotland, meanwhile, had only once failed to make it out of the tournament’s pool stages, in Australia in 2011. If the game were cancelled, Scotland wouldn’t be able to gain enough points to stay in the World Cup. World Rugby’s regulations rule out rescheduling pool games. The Scottish Rugby Union even threatened legal action against the organisers to force them to reconsider. Mark Dodson, the chief executive of Scottish rugby, told the BBC that the regulations went “against the whole sporting integrity of the tournament”. At the last minute, conditions were deemed safe enough for the match to go ahead. Japan put in an impressive performance to win 28-21 and send Scotland home.  Disruption to the World Cup was the least of the country’s concerns. The typhoon has killed at least 35 people and caused widespread damage. But the impact of extreme weather on sporting events is hard to ignore. At this summer’s Cricket World Cup in England, four games were abandoned in seven days due to heavy rain. David Richardson, the former chief executive of the International Cricket Council, complained of “extremely unseasonable weather” but said that factoring in reserve days would be “complex to deliver”. The tournament had scheduled group games on 45 consecutive days. Last month, at the World Athletics Championships in Doha, nearly a third of 70 starters in the women’s marathon failed to finish the race in extreme (though not unseasonable) heat of 33°C (91°F), despite the start time being moved to midnight to make conditions more bearable. Instances of rain—not to mention typhoons, flooding or heat—stopping play are likely to become more common as climate change makes some weather events more severe. In the case of storms such as Hagibis, a warmer atmosphere holds more water vapour, which makes them more intense. Last year saw more natural disasters than any year going back to 1980, according to Munich Re, a reinsurer (see chart). In the future, coastal regions will become more prone to storms and flooding, while inland regions will face heatwaves and flash flooding, according to Piers Forster, a professor of climate physics at the University of Leeds and one of the authors of a report on climate change and sport. A study in 2016 found that over the past 40 years, Asian typhoons such as the one threatening Japan have become 50% stronger. The tropical storms hitting America are becoming more potent, too. When it comes to sporting events, Mr Forster points out, “nowhere is safe.” What can organisers do to minimise the risks posed to sporting events by extreme weather? The most obvious solution is to incorporate more flexibility into when and where fixtures take place. America’s National Football League (NFL), whose season begins in September, at the height of the country’s hurricane season, is used to rearranging games due to extreme weather. Its rules state that organisers will attempt to reschedule any cancelled game within two days of the planned date. If the original venue is unavailable, the fixture is moved to the closest alternative site. After Hurricane Katrina devastated New Orleans in 2005, the Saints, the local team, still played a full season, moving home games to stadiums in Louisiana, Texas and New Jersey. In golf, meanwhile, the American rounds of the PGA Tour take into account seasonal weather patterns. Last year the tour began in the southern states in October, before moving to California for five weeks in the winter (the “west-coast swing”), and only heading north-east as the weather improved in April. Another option is to simply escape the elements entirely. Tennis has long been played indoors, and Wimbledon’s two retractable-roofed courts allow big matches to continue in a downpour. The switch from outside to indoors affects more than just sodden spectators, however. Jamie Murray, a doubles champion who took part in a trial of the club’s new covered court this summer, observed that “if the roof’s closed the ball travels through the air easier”. The absence of wind or glare from the sun makes playing less challenging, too. In a sport such as cricket, the effect would be even more noticeable: batsmen prefer sunny, dry conditions, which make it tricky for bowlers to make the ball “swing”, or move sideways as it travels through the air. A handful of cricket pitches, such as the Docklands Stadium in Melbourne, have a roof, but many fans insist that cricket’s exposure to the elements gives it an exciting unpredictability. Although sporting leagues can take measures to mitigate extreme weather, the Rugby World Cup shows that this is less easy to do with major one-off tournaments. Organisers should take climate further into account when picking venues. Qatar’s stifling climate is likely to make the 2022 football World Cup difficult for players and fans. Tokyo’s bid for the 2020 Olympic Games promised “mild and sunny weather” that would provide “an ideal climate for athletes to perform at their best.” When the city faced a 40°C heatwave last year, organisers were forced to admit that heat does indeed pose a risk. In an article for the Japan Times, Takeo Hirata, who is responsible for the government’s co-ordination of the games, offered a series of unconvincing solutions. These included not cutting down trees along the marathon route in order to offer runners some shade and paving roads with a special coating that reflects infrared rays. A better option might be to reschedule the events for later in the year. One member of the International Olympic Committee (IOC) told the New York Times that the main reason the Games can’t be moved from July and August is to fit the schedules of deep-pocketed American broadcasters. The cost of extreme weather could make any lost broadcast dollars seem like loose change. Climate change poses an increasingly expensive risk to many industries. Between 2016 and 2018 America suffered an average of 15 environmental disasters per year, causing over $1bn in damage (in current prices)—up from five per year between 1980 and 2015. Live sport is particularly vulnerable, however: it is often outdoors and fixtures are difficult to reschedule. Since 2004, the IOC has taken out cancelation and abandonment insurance that covers its operational costs should the Games be disrupted. With the average cost of hosting the Games at $5.2bn, according to a study in 2015, insurers and fans alike will hope that no such claims are made at next year’s Games. Rising insurance premiums may even make some events unfeasible. If sports can’t—or won’t—adapt to protect themselves from the elements, fans should expect more disruption like that seen at the Rugby World Cup this weekend.