MARTÍN VIZCARRA has been at war with Peru’s congress ever since he became president in March last year. This week, on September 30th, their rocky relationship came to a farcical turning point. Mr Vizcarra dissolved congress. The legislature struck back by suspending him from office and choosing the vice-president, Mercedes Aráoz, to replace him. She soon quit to avoid assuming the presidency, perhaps realising that her appointment was more a gesture of defiance rather than a serious proposition. But the constitutional clash has done serious damage to the country’s relatively young democracy. Peruvians cannot help but be reminded of the last time congress was closed down, in 1992. The president then was Alberto Fujimori, and his “self-coup” led to more than eight years of authoritarian and often brutal rule. He is now serving a 25-year sentence in a Peruvian jail for human-rights abuses, including the kidnapping of a journalist in 1992.  Mr Vizcarra has not carried out a coup. Unlike Mr Fujimori he has not sent tanks into the streets or dismissed the supreme court or the attorney-general. Nor has he arrested journalists. Even if congress goes home as Mr Vizcarra has demanded, a 27-member “permanent committee” of congress will remain to act as a check on him. But his grounds for dissolving congress are questioned by many constitutional lawyers. So are the actions of congress. Congress tried to rush through partisan appointments to the constitutional tribunal. Mr Vizcarra took that as a denial of confidence in the government (the second during this parliament), which in theory allows the dissolution of congress. His interpretation is debatable. The confrontation is the latest sign of dysfunction in a governing class compromised by corruption and riven by faction. Its origin lay in the general election of 2016, when Pedro Pablo Kuczynski, a former investment banker, became president. He narrowly defeated Keiko Fujimori, Alberto’s daughter, but her Popular Force party (FP) won a majority in congress. Ms Fujimori vowed that her party would use its position in the legislature to enact its own governing programme. FP and its allies sought to paralyse Mr Kuczynski’s government. A second threat of impeachment led to his resignation in March 2018 and to Mr Vizcarra’s promotion to the presidency. Allegations of corruption have sidelined both Mr Kuczynski and Ms Fujimori. He is under house arrest while police investigate claims that he used his previous position as finance minister to engage in corrupt business dealings with Odebrecht, a Brazilian construction firm that bribed politicians across Latin America. (Two other former presidents face trials for allegations linked to Odebrecht and a third committed suicide in April before he could be arrested on Odebrecht-linked charges.) Ms Fujimori is being held in prison before her trial on charges of receiving undeclared campaign contributions from Odebrecht. But the battle between congress and the presidency has not let up. Mr Vizcarra resorted to drastic measures to push through his legislative priorities. These included holding a referendum last year on a package of anti-corruption measures, which congress then grudgingly enacted. Since then president and congress have warred over other measures, such as a proposal to regulate campaign finance. Congress’s ethics commission has protected legislators accused of corruption. Some fujimoristas with links to dodgy private universities, which are thought to launder money, are trying to shut down the agency that supervises them. In May congress refused to approve some political reforms backed by Mr Vizcarra, including the creation of an independent body to review congressmen’s immunity from prosecution. On September 26th congress’s constitutional committee rejected Mr Vizcarra’s proposal to end the stalemate by holding congressional and presidential elections a year early next April (in which neither he nor members of the current congress would be permitted to run). A more adroit politician than Mr Vizcarra might have avoided such a rupture with congress. But it is clear that he has most of the advantages. The heads of the armed forces and the police have publicly backed him, as have the associations representing governors and mayors. He has an approval rating of just under 50%. Congress is widely loathed. According to a poll published on September 29th by La República, a newspaper, 87% of Peruvians disapprove of it. Some opposition congressmen have said they will barricade themselves in the Legislative Palace, where congress sits. But with the police and army behind Mr Vizcarra, who also controls the purse strings, he is in a position to wait them out. No one knows how the standoff will end. The Organisation of American States has said that the constitutional court should rule on the legality of Mr Vizcarra’s dissolution of congress. Ms Aráoz, who belongs to no party, has called for a general election, which would allow voters to choose a new president and congress. But new leaders have not emerged to take the place of today’s discredited politicians. The long-running crisis is taking a toll on investors’ confidence, and thus the economy. The dark days of 1992 have not returned, but the future is looking cloudy.