CANADA’S GENERAL ELECTION, held on October 21st, proved more divisive than decisive. With just a few votes still to be counted, Justin Trudeau’s Liberal Party has squandered the handsome majority it won in 2015, losing around 30 seats in the 338-seat Parliament, mostly to the Conservatives and the separatist Bloc Québécois. The Conservatives won the largest share of the popular vote. Now Mr Trudeau must contemplate life as the leader of a minority government. The result is a sharp rebuff to Mr Trudeau, who had swept into office promising “real change” in Canadian politics, only to be dragged down by several controversies in which he seemed to be practising politics as usual. Among the most damaging was the finding by Parliament’s ethics commissioner that he had been wrong to press Jody Wilson-Raybould, his attorney-general, to intervene in the prosecution for bribery of SNC-Lavalin, an engineering firm in Quebec. She later quit the cabinet and was ejected from the Liberal Party. (She won a seat in Vancouver running as an independent candidate.) The affair did not help Mr Trudeau’s reputation for supporting womens’ and indigenous peoples’ rights (Ms Wilson-Raybould is descended from the Kwakwaka’wakw). Mr Trudeau was also embarrassed by the publication during the campaign of photos of him wearing brown- and blackface as a young man.  Yet restoring his personal brand may be the least of Mr Trudeau’s problems. In his first term the big menaces were external—from President Donald Trump’s America-first trade protectionism to China’s retaliation for the arrest (at America’s behest) of a Chinese telecoms executive. It blocked some Canadian exports and detained two Canadian citizens; Chinese courts sentenced two others to death on drugs charges. Those strains are compounded by internal fractures. The election results point to a sharply divided country, with a Conservative stronghold in the oil-and-gas-producing western provinces of Alberta and Saskatchewan and the Bloc Québécois resurgent in Quebec. That will make Canada difficult to govern. Mr Trudeau’s first task will be to find a party to back his government. Canada has plenty of experience of Parliaments in which no party has a majority, for example in 2004, 2006 and 2008. The Liberals’ most natural partner is the New Democratic Party (although the NDP has lost 18 seats). The NDP’s leader, Jagmeet Singh, said during the campaign he would do “whatever it takes” to keep the Conservatives from power. That means that Mr Trudeau is likely to be able to enact his signature policies in his second term as prime minister. These include a fresh tax cut for the middle class, a ban on assault weapons and more ambitious targets for reducing emissions of greenhouse gases. But he will now have to reckon with the priorities of the NDP, which shares some of the Liberals’ goals but not its centrist instincts. The NDP has a long wishlist, including a national government-run drug plan (costing an estimated C$43bn, or $33bn), interest-free student loans, cuts to phone bills, investment in affordable housing and a new “super wealth tax”. It also wants stronger action on climate change. Mr Singh opposes construction of the Trans Mountain Expansion (TMX), a project to twin an existing oil pipeline from Alberta to a terminal near Vancouver. That will put him at odds with Mr Trudeau, whose government bought the pipeline from a private firm in 2018 and backed its expansion as a way to help Alberta’s oil industry. Yet if the Liberals are pushed to the left by Mr Singh and the NDP, this will sharpen the alienation already felt by solidly Conservative Alberta and Saskatchewan. With their smaller populations, they have long chafed at the imbalance of power between them and the more populous central provinces. Their anger has deepened since 2014, when global oil prices slumped, causing local economic hardship. Jason Kenney, the Conservative premier of Alberta, blames the Liberal’s climate-change policies for worsening the situation. Mr Trudeau did not placate westerners during the campaign. In the last leaders’ debate, he abandoned his careful rhetoric of balancing natural-resource development with environmental protection, choosing instead to attack the “oil interests” and provincial leaders opposed to his climate-change policies. Nor does Mr Trudeau receive much credit from westerners for buying the TMX pipeline. Many in the region suspect, without much evidence, that the government bought the project in order to kill it. None of this bodes well for co-operation with the provinces, a necessity in a country where jurisdiction is shared on important issues such as the environment. In 2015 Alberta and Ontario were led by left-leaning parties. Now that both provinces are governed by Conservatives, they will oppose the national carbon tax that they initially supported. Quebec poses a different problem and it is not the usual one of separation. Although the Bloc Québécois, led by Yves-François Blanchet, favours secession it did not make that a centrepiece of its campaign. The headache it will pose comes from a law passed by Quebec’s right-leaning government this year, which prohibits many civil servants from wearing religious symbols including turbans, hijabs and kippas. The Bloc is solidly behind it. Mr Blanchet has vowed to block any federal attempt to challenge the law, something Mr Trudeau is under pressure to do from his own supporters. Canada’s internal fissures would be difficult for a majority government to deal with, let alone a minority administration that must win support from smaller parties. Mr Trudeau, the son of a former prime minister, can only hope that his fortunes follow his father’s. In an election in 1972 Pierre Trudeau saw his Liberal majority government reduced to a minority. Two years later he won a new majority. He ended up governing Canada, with a brief interruption, until 1984. His son is no doubt hoping for a similar comeback.