ALTHOUGH ALFRED NOBEL’S will states that the annual prizes bearing his name should be given to those who “have conferred the greatest benefit to mankind”, the science awards have a tendency to end up in the hands of those who have made esoteric, if profound, advances. Not so with this year’s prize in chemistry. Three researchers—two from America and one from Japan—have been rewarded for their work in developing the lithium-ion battery. Lithium-ion batteries have transformed society because they are lightweight and rechargeable. They have therefore become ubiquitous in everything from mobile phones, tablets and laptops to electric cars. They could also, in the future, become important in storing the intermittently available energy produced by renewable sources such as wind and solar power, as the world attempts to move away from fossil fuels.  Lithium is the lightest metal in the periodic table (it will float on water, though not for long, because it is also one of the most reactive and turns rapidly into lithium hydroxide), and its atoms have three electrons. Two are tightly bound to its nucleus but the third is easily dislodged to create a positively charged lithium ion. The beginnings of making a battery out of lithium and its ions came in the 1970s, when the world was gripped by the oil crisis. Exxon, a large oil company, was interested in developing sources of energy that did not involve petroleum and one of this year’s laureates, Stanley Whittingham, was working at the time in the firm’s research division. He was investigating potential superconductors. Specifically, he was interested in solid materials that contained atom-sized spaces. When ions entered these spaces—a phenomenon called intercalation—some of the properties of the solid material, such as its conductivity, would change. Dr Whittingham discovered that when lithium ions intercalated into a substance called titanium disulphide, the interaction between the two stored a useful amount of energy. Using metallic lithium as an anode and titanium disulphide as a cathode, he built a rechargeable battery that worked at room temperature. In it, lithium at the anode is ionised. The ions thus produced then move from the anode, through an intervening electrolyte, and into the spaces in the titanium disulphide cathode. The liberated electrons, meanwhile, pass through an external circuit to create an electric current that can be used to do work. During its recharge cycle, the external current is reversed and the lithium ions move back through the electrolyte in response. At first Exxon decided the battery had great potential and decided to commercialise it. But when oil prices fell back the company lost interest. It was about then that the second of this year’s chemistry laureates, John Goodenough, who was working at Oxford University, came across the idea and decided to try to improve it. In 1980 he found that, by replacing the titanium disulphide in the cathode with cobalt oxide, he could double the output voltage (see diagram). Akira Yoshino, the third laureate, took Dr Goodenough’s idea and transformed it into the modern battery that sits inside the world’s computers and phones. In the 1980s he was working at the Asahi Kasei Corporation, in Japan, at a moment when electronics companies were becoming increasingly interested in lightweight batteries that could power new electronic devices such as video cameras and cordless telephones. Dr Yoshino was happy with Dr Goodenough’s cathode, but felt that the anode needed redesigning. Instead of lithium, he tried various carbon-based materials that might hold lithium ions. He found success with petroleum coke, a by-product of the fossil-fuel industry. This, he discovered, could hold such ions in abundance. His design was not only safer than using a pure lithium anode (lithium has a distressing tendency to catch fire), but longer lasting, too. In Dr Yoshino’s version of the battery, both anode and cathode have a long life because they are not damaged by chemical reactions as the battery is used or recharged. By 1991 the first lithium-ion battery based on Dr Yoshino’s design had been commercialised by Sony, an electronics company. Speaking at a press conference shortly after being awarded the prize, Dr Yoshino said he had pursued his research in the 1980s purely to satisfy his own curiosity, without much thought to whether or not his inventions would one day be useful. Given the lithium-ion battery’s subsequent (and continuing) importance, Dr Yoshino’s curiosity ended up fulfilling Nobel’s will to the letter.