List Boris Johnson’s troubles and you might suppose that his Conservative Party, which held its annual conference this week, must be struggling. The British prime minister’s Brexit plan received a cool reception from the European Union. He faces questions about how a close female friend secured public grants and has been accused of groping a journalist (he denies doing wrong). Mr Johnson’s personal ratings are poor, especially among women. Yet the Tories are enjoying a Boris bounce in opinion polls—although recent surveys have been unusually variable. Mr Johnson’s promise to leave the EU by October 31st “do or die” plays well with Brexiteers. Remainers are turning to the Liberal Democrats, who seem to have been closing the gap on the main opposition party, Labour.  Inaccessible Island, an uninhabited mid-Atlantic rock, is aptly named. Yet its coast is covered in litter. Peter Ryan, an ornithologist at the University of Cape Town, has been visiting since 1984, analysing the origins of the trash. In 1989 two-thirds of plastic bottles had come from (relatively nearby) South America. By 2018 three-quarters were from Asia. That is too far from Inaccessible for the bottles to have floated there, which suggests that ships’ crews are dumping them, contrary to an international anti-pollution convention. On September 30th Peter Navarro, the White House’s Sinophobic trade adviser, dismissed as “fake news” a Bloomberg report that President Donald Trump had approved a plan to force American investors to dump shares in Chinese companies. Such firms have raised over $70bn by selling shares in America since 2000; 24 have floated this year, despite the trans-Pacific trade war. Americans also own $160bn-worth of assets on Chinese mainland exchanges. Shunning thriving Chinese firms may harm Americans’ pension and mutual-fund investments. Britain’s Financial Conduct Authority, a regulator, is proposing a ban on crypto-derivatives—options, futures and other contracts linked to bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies. (Its consultation ended on October 3rd.) Because crypto-monies are not legally recognised currencies, the FCA believes, sellers of crypto-derivatives cannot claim their wares are needed for hedging purposes. Cryptocurrencies’ prices tend to move together, vary wildly and respond to hype—measured, for instance, by Google searches. The FCA thinks crypto-amateurs do not understand the risks. The chorus to this year’s most-streamed Spotify track, “Señorita” by Shawn Mendes, begins 15 seconds in. Songwriters have been getting to the catchy bits quicker. For that, thank (or blame) platforms such as Spotify, on which musicians now rely to pay much of their rent. Artists are paid per play, provided the listener stays tuned for 30 seconds. Back in 1987 Bono took two minutes to breathe the lyrics of “Where The Streets Have No Name”, the first track on U2’s blockbuster album, “The Joshua Tree”. Those were the days, my friend.