ON FRIDAY OCTOBER 4th Daryl Morey, the general manager of the Houston Rockets, a National Basketball Association (NBA) team, posted a tweet in support of protesters in Hong Kong that read “Fight for freedom, stand with Hong Kong”. The tweet, tame by American standards, sparked a furore in China, including among thousands of nationalists on Chinese social media. Nearly a month later, an analysis of Twitter data suggests that much of the online conversation that erupted in the wake of the scandal, far from being genuine criticism from concerned citizens, was pro-China propaganda originating from social-media bots and trolls on the mainland. To arrive at this conclusion, The Economist analysed more than 419,000 tweets about the controversy posted by 75,000 Twitter accounts that commented on it in the week after Mr Morey’s original tweet. Which countries the tweets came from cannot be asserted with certainty. Twitter is blocked in China. But the ban is widely circumvented with virtual private networks (VPNs), which allow users to surf the web through a foreign server.  Some of the accounts examined had been opened after Mr Morey’s tweet, whereas others predated it. Using a machine-learning algorithm developed by researchers at the Indiana University Network Science Institute, each Twitter account in our sample was categorised as a real user or a suspected bot or troll based on 1,200 characteristics. These include the account’s friends and followers, social network, activity patterns, language and the sentiments of their posts. The results show that nearly a quarter of the accounts tweeting about the NBA in the days after the incident had a higher than 50% chance of being bots or trolls. Many of these “suspect” accounts were created soon after Mr Morey’s tweet. Indeed, in the following week, the number of new suspect accounts increased by 400% over the previous seven days. In that earlier week, about 47% of the newly-created accounts in our sample were suspected of malicious activity by the machine-learning algorithm. After the tweet, this proportion rose to 60%. China may be involved in broader social-media propaganda efforts. The dubious accounts tweeting about the NBA controversy display spikes in activity which coincide with political events in Hong Kong, such as when Carrie Lam, the territory’s embattled chief executive, promised in September that a controversial draft bill allowing the extradition of criminal suspects from Hong Kong to China would be withdrawn. This is not surprising; the Chinese government has previously used social media to spread misinformation about political events, especially the recent pro-democracy protests in Hong Kong. In total, 33% of the accounts identified as suspect by The Economist mentioned Hong Kong in their previous fifty tweets.