IN THE mid-1970s Gerald Ford, America’s president, distributed buttons bearing the acronym WIN, for “whip inflation now”. Nowadays policymakers strive to revive inflation rather than thrash it into submission. In rich economies rates above 2% are rare; inflation has tumbled in developing economies, too. Our special report this week argues that the anchoring of inflation expectations, technological change and globalisation have conspired to make inflation a less meaningful indicator. Policy has to adapt to the strange new rules that now govern economies.  Three years after Saudi Arabia’s crown prince, Muhammad bin Salman, suggested floating up to 5% of Saudi Aramco, the world’s biggest oil company is eager to get the job done. It may well announce its intentions this month. It is making plans to list at first on the Tadawul, Riyadh’s stockmarket, which it would dominate, even if the company is valued well below the $2trn the prince first hoped for. Some international investors have voiced concern about a lack of liquidity on the Saudi exchange. India’s banks have had problems for a long time. But concern is turning to panic. A run on PMC, an Indian co-operative bank, is in its third week. PMC’s troubles have investors on edge. Shares in most listed banks have suffered and those of one, Yes Bank, have collapsed by 40% in the past month. Concern also swirls around India’s shadow banks, which back long-term loans with short-term debt; some are suffering a severe funding squeeze. Perhaps a tenth of all loans, maybe more, are dud. Cleaning up the financial system is a gigantic but necessary task. A baby born in Streeterville, a prosperous district served by the Red Line on the “L”, Chicago’s rapid-transit system, can expect to live for 90 years. That is 30 years longer than an infant born in the most blighted parts of Englewood, farther south on the same line. No American city has a bigger gap. Englewood’s population is 25,000, nearly 40% smaller than in 2000, as people have fled violence, poverty and poor housing. The Nobel science prizes for 2019 were awarded this week. Half of the physics prize went to Michel Mayor and Didier Queloz, who in 1995 were the first researchers to discover a planet beyond the solar system—a mere 50 light-years away. Their method relies on the Doppler effect: as a planet orbits its star, its gravity causes the star to move, which in turn causes the frequency of the starlight reaching Earth to oscillate—in the same way as the frequency of an ambulance siren shifts as the vehicle passes you in the street. The other half-prize went to James Peebles, who turned cosmology into a rigorous discipline.