SOUTH AFRICANS are growing impatient with Cyril Ramaphosa, the former union boss, anti-apartheid activist and tycoon who is now their president. In his 20 months in office, no one has been prosecuted for the looting of the state that took place under his predecessor, Jacob Zuma. In an interview with The Economist in London on October 13th, Mr Ramaphosa gave a message to his critics. And it involves a rip-roaring second world war film. In “Force 10 from Navarone”, explains Mr Ramaphosa, British commandos try to blow up a dam so that the water will sweep away a bridge that the Nazis want to use. When the explosives go off, nothing happens. The commandos are furious. “It didn’t work!” they say. But the explosives expert tells them to wait. The dam is structurally damaged and will soon collapse, he says. Once the fuse has been lit, there is no going back.  For Mr Ramaphosa that fuse is the National Prosecuting Authority of South Africa, one of several institutions he has sought to revive after their evisceration by Mr Zuma. The spectacular results people want may take time, but the process Mr Ramaphosa has set in motion “is irrevocable”, he says. Arrests will happen. A big bang is also what many analysts say is needed in South Africa’s economy. GDP per head barely grew during the nine years that Mr Zuma was in power. He dramatically increased the size of the state as his cronies allegedly ransacked it. Public debt as a share of GDP doubled from 28% to 56%. Erratic and incoherent policies put off investors. Africa’s most industrialised economy became one of its most sluggish. Under Mr Ramaphosa there has, as yet, been little sign of improvement. GDP growth has been negative in three of the past six quarters. The official unemployment rate has grown to 29%—even higher than under his predecessor. Eskom, the state-run electricity company, has spiralling debts equivalent to 8.5% of GDP and remains insolvent and unreformed. Many are frustrated with a president who can seem keener to talk about reform than to enact it. On August 27th, in an effort to nudge the president, his finance minister, Tito Mboweni, published a 77-page paper on the National Treasury website, replete with sensible ideas that could form the basis of a new “growth strategy”, expected within the next two weeks, ahead of a budget on October 30th. If implemented Mr Mboweni’s ideas could bring the country closer to the 4-5% growth rate required to dent its horrifically high unemployment. Yet how many of Mr Mboweni’s suggestions does Mr Ramaphosa endorse? “I endorse all of them,” says the president. Does that include some of the more controversial ideas, such as on migration? South Africa desperately needs more skilled workers, yet it is all but impossible for foreign graduates or entrepreneurs to move there in search of work. Will he liberalise the visa rules so that there is an open-door policy for skilled migrants? “Absolutely,” says Mr Ramaphosa, citing the benefits enterprising migrants have brought to Silicon Valley. “That’s precisely what we need.” Another treasury priority is for municipalities to pay their electricity bills. Many currently do not. Soweto, a township on the outskirts of Johannesburg, owes Eskom about 18bn rand ($1.2bn). Mr Ramaphosa explains that non-payment stems partly from the history of apartheid when, as a union leader, he called for rent boycotts in townships. “But now I’m saying the war is over, the struggle is over, we’ve now got to pay our way.” He adds: “You cannot have a free ride on things that cost money to produce—and electricity is one of those.” Having people pay for the electricity they use is just one step towards putting Eskom on a sound financial footing. Another idea mooted by Mr Mboweni is to sell off state-owned power stations, so as to raise money, make generation more efficient and pass financial risk to the private sector. Here Mr Ramaphosa is more cautious. There is “no way” that he would sell some of the new (and fault-ridden) power stations, but he would welcome buyers for older ones, so as to extend their lives. Even then, though, buyers would have to pledge to ensure that communities in coal-rich areas receive a “just transition”. This sounds like classic Ramaphosism: reform, but only up to a point, and after much consultation. He endorses all of Mr Mboweni’s tough ideas, but with a crucial qualification: “Of course you can’t implement them all in one go.” So how determined is he really? Does he have a sense of urgency—and is he willing to pursue reforms where there will be losers as well as winners? “I prefer win-win solutions,” says Mr Ramaphosa, “but of course there comes a time when there will be losers along the way.” What matters is to avoid “calamitous outcomes”. He believes that the skills he honed as a union leader and as one of the negotiators who ended apartheid will help him ensure that “everyone rises from the table thinking they are a winner.” Does this mean he plans to appease special interests? What about the people not at the table, like the unemployed or the pupils at failing schools? In South Africa nearly 80% of maths teachers cannot do sums expected of 12- and 13-year-olds. Unions have successfully fought to prevent incompetent teachers from being sacked. How can South Africa have a good education system without reducing the power of the teaching unions? Or create new jobs for the jobless when the government is more concerned with preserving the existing jobs of unionised workers? Here the president says that he is trying to push his “allies” in the unions to reform. He likens the situation to having a rotten toe from diabetes: it is sad to lose it, but it would be worse to lose a leg. “It could well mean that your whole leg and your whole life could be at risk. You have to make choices.” “So when is Dr Ramaphosa going to operate?” asks your correspondent. The president guffaws. “People are asking when the operation…,” he begins, before wisely deciding against continuing with the metaphor. “People are asking when are you going to arrest people? When are you going to put people into jail?” But it is not his job to arrest people, he argues, correctly. It is to “strengthen the institutions that must do their work”. Will they be able to go after powerful people, such as Ace Magashule, the secretary-general of the ruling party, who has been accused of corruption? “Once the institutions are strengthened, they should be able to go after anybody—including the president,'' says Mr Ramaphosa, not quite answering the question. And they must be allowed to do so “without fear, favour or prejudice”. Nelson Mandela was widely reported to have wanted Mr Ramaphosa to succeed him two decades ago, but the party picked Thabo Mbeki instead. The Economist asks whether Mr Ramaphosa wishes he had got the top job sooner. “It’s a difficult one. It’s a tough job...being the president of South Africa at this time...I wish had come in when the economy was better.” South Africans are hoping that it is better late than never. If their cautiously reforming president stumbles, the crooks who captured so much of the state under his predecessor are itching to grab it again.