“NOW the fun begins,” grins Jan Linaric, as the autobahn speed limit falls away and he eases his Mercedes S-Class saloon up to 230 kilometres per hour (143mph). The excitement soon fades; the appearance of roadworks forces a rapid brake to 80kph. But it is plenty for your jumpy correspondent. Visitors to Germany quickly learn the thrill, or terror, of autobahn driving. At any time well over half the 13,000-km network has no speed limit. Mr Linaric, a cheerful Slovene who co-owns a limousine firm in Berlin, says his Russian and Saudi clients sometimes ask him to drive as fast as possible, and he is happy to oblige. Every attempt to limit motorway speeds, bringing Germany into line with the rest of the world (bar North Korea, Somalia, Afghanistan and a few other honourable exceptions), has flopped; a 1973 law imposed in the wake of the oil crisis lasted just four months. The latest attempt, triggered by a church-backed petition, was a proposal by the Green Party to impose a 130kph speed limit across the network. But on October 17th the Bundestag rejected it by a huge majority.  Proponents, including environmental groups, churches and police, say a speed limit could save at least 80 lives a year, reduce annual carbon emissions by several million tonnes and accelerate the transition to electric cars (which struggle at high speeds). Opponents say Germany’s roads are already safer than most, and reckon the emission savings from a 130kph limit negligible. Many petrolheads agree with Mr Linaric, who says he is more alert driving at 200kph than at 130. Scarce data make definitive judgements hard. Yet the battle runs deeper than numbers. “It’s a sign of freedom for Germans to be able to drive the speed they think they should,” says Malte Dringenberg of the German Automobile Club, a motorists’ association. For some, driving at hair-raising speed in crisply engineered cars on pristine tarmac delivers the sort of thrill otherwise unavailable in over-regulated Germany. Carmakers act accordingly; premium models run up to 250kph, and sports cars higher still. Many German drivers already feel besieged by diesel bans and hostile climate activists. Greens compare the speed-limit debate to America’s endless rows over guns. Christian Lindner, leader of the liberal Free Democrats, accuses them of waging a Kulturkampf (culture war) on motorists. For now, resistance in the government means drivers like Mr Linaric, who considers the proposal “complete nonsense”, are safe. The transport minister, Andreas Scheur, has said a speed limit is “against all common sense”. Ministers fear the mighty car lobby, and look nervously to France, where a cut in the speed limit on rural roads last year helped spur the gilets jaunes uprising. Yet with opinion polls showing a majority of voters backing change, motorists slowly ageing and the Greens probably headed for government after the next election, in time the brakes will surely be slammed on Germany’s speed demons. “Driving without a limit,” says Ferdinand Dudenhöffer at the University of Duisburg-Essen, “will soon be history”.