The Second Founding: How the Civil War and Reconstruction Remade the Constitution. By Eric Foner. W.W. Norton; 256 pages; $26.95 and £18.99 RECONSTRUCTION, AMERICA’S reckoning with how to rejig a civilisation after slavery, is usually dated from 1865, when the civil war ended, to 1877. In his new book, Eric Foner, an emeritus professor at Columbia University, contends that the endeavour is still under way. The aftermath of the civil war and the three Reconstruction amendments have not, Mr Foner writes, set everything right for “the world’s first biracial democracy”.  Abolishing slavery, guaranteeing equality before the law and removing a racial restriction on the right to vote—the missions of the 13th, 14th and 15th Amendments—were “profound” shifts, Mr Foner writes, no mere “alteration of an existing structure”. They were a “constitutional revolution” for democratic governance; a “second founding” after America’s beta launch nearly a century earlier. The first founding was premised on chattel slavery. But the second did not herald a society anchored in complete equality. The language ratified in the three constitutional amendments had replaced more radical versions that fell away in the drafting and debates. And the Reconstruction constitution faced a sceptical audience at the Supreme Court, which delivered a succession of rulings scaling back or eliminating their protections. The 13th Amendment began as more than just a bar on slavery and indentured servitude. Charles Sumner, a leading anti-slavery senator, drew on the French Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen for his first draft: “all persons are equal before the law” and “no person can hold another as a slave”. The final version, approved to “wild celebration” in Congress, dropped the equality talk and included a caveat: “punishment for a crime” was a valid reason to hold someone in captivity. This “inadvertently” set the stage, the book explains, for the “widespread leasing of convict labourers to plantations, mines and industries in the South”. The loophole also made constitutional modern mass incarceration, a scourge that disproportionately affects black people. The longest amendment in the Constitution—the 14th—is full of revolutionary ideas. Equal protection of the laws. No arbitrary deprivations of life, liberty or property, or of citizens’ “privileges or immunities”. Citizenship for everyone—without regard to colour—who is born in America. Yet the language could have been more sweeping (“absolute equality before the law of all persons” was in the earlier drafts) and it took one more constitutional change to address the right to vote. The 15th Amendment removed race as a limit on the franchise, but it was “far too weak” in the eyes of John Bingham, a lawyer, congressman and architect of the 14th. The “half-way proposition” (as another senator put it) permitted states to stifle black voices through ostensibly non-racial rules, such as poll taxes, property qualifications and literacy tests. These, Mr Foner writes, in effect “eliminate[d] the black vote a generation after Reconstruction”. Whether out of simple racism or a desire to protect states’ rights—or, as Mr Foner suggests, a combination of the two—the Supreme Court often betrayed the promise of Reconstruction in the final decades of the 19th century. They ruled, for instance, that Congress could not bar private businesses from discriminating against blacks and, in Plessy v Ferguson, blessed segregation as compatible with equal protection. Just six years ago, another 5-4 majority cut out the heart of the Voting Rights Act, which since 1965 had shielded minority voters from discrimination at the polls. “The Second Founding” closes with an irony. The 14th Amendment has become a “vehicle through which Americans of all backgrounds can claim greater rights”—including abortion choice, gender equality and gay marriage. It allows people to “seek redress from various forms of discrimination”, too. The main beneficiaries in recent decades, though, have been not racial minorities but “white plaintiffs complaining of reverse discrimination”. The drive for a fairer, more just America, Mr Foner aptly concludes, is “a work in progress”.