PRESIDENT DONALD TRUMP, who pledged in April to fight “all the subpoenas”, has been dealt another blow in his battle to keep his tax returns private. In May, a federal judge in Washington, DC refused to quash a subpoena directing Mazars USA, the president's accounting firm, to give eight years of financial records to the House of Representatives. Mr Trump called that ruling “crazy”, blamed it on “an Obama-appointed judge” and took his case to the Appeals Court for the District of Columbia Circuit. On October 11th, a three-judge panel at that tribunal decided, by a 2-1 vote, that the demand to scrutinise Mr Trump’s finances falls within the power of the House to issue subpoenas for a “legislative purpose”. But even this second loss does not mean the Democrats will get hold of Mr Trump's business records any time soon. The president could play a legal game that could keep the battle brewing even longer than his first term in the White House. In his majority opinion, Judge David Tatel wrote that after considering “the weighty issues at stake in this case”, he and his colleague, Judge Patricia Millett, found the subpoena from the House oversight committee to be “valid and enforceable”. The subpoena, issued in May, cited four reasons why the committee needed the information: to determine if Mr Trump “may have engaged in illegal conduct”; if he had “undisclosed conflicts of interest”; if he was complying with the anti-corruption rules in the constitution’s Emoluments Clauses; and if he had “accurately reported his finances to the Office of Government Ethics”. Investigating these matters, the committee said, was central to its interest in reviewing “multiple laws and legislative proposals” to tighten ethics rules.  Judge Tatel emphasised that Congress’s subpoena power is not unbounded. “Expansive as it is”, the power may not be used to “usurp the other branches’ constitutionally designated functions” or to “violate individuals’ constitutionally protected rights”. Congress is not “a law enforcement or trial agency” and may not pass bills of attainder—that is, laws that punish someone without a trial. The House subpoena to Mazars did not cross the line, Judge Tatel wrote: the House is actively considering at least three disclosure and ethics bills and “an interest in past illegality can be wholly consistent with an intent to enact remedial legislation”. It stands to reason that legislators might seek financial records from a president’s accountant when drafting laws to strengthen presidential accountability. The dissenting judge on the panel, Neomi Rao, saw things differently. A recent appointee of Mr Trump, Judge Rao wrote that the majority’s view of the case “breaks new ground” by blessing the subpoena “as part of the legislative power” when its true design is to investigate “allegations of illegal conduct against the president”. There should be a bright line between Congress’s power to investigate for legislative purposes and its power to investigate in service of another constitutionally specified power: impeachment. “When Congress seeks information about the president’s wrongdoing”, Judge Rao wrote, “it does not matter whether the investigation also has a legislative purpose”. The two pursuits have nothing to do with one another and should not be conflated: “Investigations of impeachable offenses simply are not, and never have been, within Congress’s legislative power”. To confuse the two roles is to risk damage to America’s separation of powers. Permitting the House oversight committee to nose through Mr Trump’s books, Judge Rao wrote, “would turn Congress into a roving inquisition over a co-equal branch of government”. The warring opinions each labour to refute the main claims of the other, with Judge Tatel decrying Judge Rao’s interpretation as “novel” (twice) and Judge Rao returning the favour. On the central matter the majority seems to have the more substantial argument. No “case law supports the dissent”, Judge Tatel observed, and his colleague’s stance could leave Congress with an all-or-nothing choice between pursuing impeachment and remaining inert when government officials behave badly. Judge Rao “would not even allow Congress to make the quintessentially legislative judgment that some concerns about potential misconduct or illegality are better addressed through oversight and legislation than impeachment”. Her opinion also implies that only an express House vote announcing the beginning of an impeachment inquiry would permit the body to issue subpoenas in service of impeachment. But the constitution requires no such thing. Another ominous implication lurks in the dissent’s comment that it is “unnecessary here to determine the scope of impeachable offences”, as if this determination is something over which judges—rather than members of the House of Representatives—have a say. The majority opinion may be better reasoned, but Judge Rao’s 68-page dissent lends the impression that the legality of the House subpoena is at least a debatable question. That gives Mr Trump’s lawyers a lifeline to keep up the fight either by requesting that the entire DC Circuit court revisit the question “en banc” (as a full court) or by going straight to the Supreme Court. Laurence Tribe, a law professor at Harvard, expects “at least five votes” among the justices to affirm Judge Tatel’s ruling. He does not reckon that Justices Neil Gorsuch or Brett Kavanaugh—Mr Trump’s two high-court appointees—would agree with Judge Rao's analysis. Looking at the calendar, the president may have a better option than running to the justices. Stephen Vladeck, a law professor at the University of Texas, notes that because the subpoena fight has Mr Trump playing defence, not offence, he may pivot from an aggressive litigation strategy that has seen him ask for extraordinary relief from the Supreme Court before lower courts have completed their work. The DC Circuit would probably deny Mr Trump an en banc hearing, but applying for one could put the matter on hold for several months, and after being rebuffed he would then have 90 days before having to appeal to the Supreme Court. Since the justices usually afford presidents “special solicitude” in separation of powers matters, Mr Vladeck says, a majority may well temporarily block the appeals-court ruling until the Supreme Court can fully consider the case. That means an oral argument a year from now, at the earliest, and a decision well after the 2020 presidential election. In the meantime, the president’s books would stay shut.