SOME ON the picket line in Chicago jingled tambourines and blew whistles; many asked for selfies; all cheered when Senator Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts promised to “stand with our unions”. “Everyone in America should support you in this strike”, she told a crowd of several hundred people, mostly teachers and support staff, who were huddled in a park by a closed school on October 22nd. “You fight for the children of this city, and the children of this country”. Ms Warren’s sympathy was obvious: she wore an overcoat of dazzling red, matching the red shirts, woolly hats and sweatshirts of the assembled members of the Chicago Teachers Union (CTU). Ms Warren, herself a former teacher, is not the only presidential aspirant eager to be seen as allied with Chicago teachers as they strike for better pay and more resources in schools. Joe Biden made an encouraging phone call to the union leaders the day Ms Warren visited. But the Massachusetts senator—who is favoured by around a quarter of Democrats, mostly left-leaning ones, to be their party’s presidential candidate—has proved especially quick in showing up beside strikers. In September, she appeared in Detroit on a picket line of car-workers from the United Auto Workers union, supporting their strike against GM.  By appearing with a union in Chicago Ms Warren was able to promote her broad message that inequality of wealth and income are too great in America. And by standing with teachers, flanked by Randi Weingarten, the president of the American Federation of Teachers, she also had a chance to publicise her plan for more federal spending on primary and secondary schools. Unsurprisingly, such promises of handouts went down well with the crowd. The 25,000 teachers in Chicago’s public-school system, America’s third-largest, walked out on October 17th. By sending some 360,000 pupils home from classes, and forcing the cancellation of after-school activities, sports events and Halloween parties, the CTU is trying to push the hand of Chicago’s mayor, Lori Lightfoot. Ms Lightfoot is a relative newcomer to politics. But she is no push-over. She was overwhelmingly elected in May, winning every ward in Chicago, after a strong, grass-roots campaign. Her opponent, Toni Preckwinkle, had been overwhelmingly favoured by teachers: the CTU gave $164,000 to Ms Preckwinkle’s campaign, none to Ms Lightoot’s. The view from City Hall is that Chicago’s teachers are being unreasonable. In response to a report by an independent fact-finder in July, Ms Lightfoot’s team has already agreed to raise teacher pay by an average of 16% over five years. Few workers in other fields would call that miserly. But the CTU is demanding a 15% raise over just three years, as well as cheaper health insurance, as well as the creation of more community schools, guarantees of smaller class sizes, the creation of affordable housing for the needy. They also want, reasonably enough, every school to have a librarian and a nurse on duty. An estimate by Illinois Policy, a fiscally conservative think-tank, suggests the CTU proposals would end up costing the average taxpayer in the city $235 more each year—compared with just $13 more a year for Ms Lightfoot’s plans. But the CTU wants to win concessions on matters beyond pay and conditions because this would help establish a precedent that the union can shape wider policy. How long will Ms Lightfoot dare to face down the union? A similar strike in 2012 lasted for seven school days. For now, the teachers seem ready to go on striking. Ms Lightfoot knows that her predecessor, Rahm Emanuel, saw a dramatic plunge in popularity in his second term. That was in part due to his handling of police shootings, but it was also because—in predominantly black and depopulating neighbourhoods—Mr Emanuel struck a tough stance against the CTU. He forced through the closure of dozens of underused schools and clashed with teachers. Although she is African American herself, Ms Lightfoot knows she is not especially popular with black voters. But the Chicago mayor has a bigger problem than striking teachers on her hands. On October 23rd she revealed her budget plan for the city, which includes efforts to reduce a $838m deficit. Achieving this will involve a host of measures: refinancing $1.3bn in city debt, adding a tax for solitary users of Uber or Lyft in the city, putting up restaurant taxes and raising the cost of parking in the city. If voters are squeezed for more taxes their inclination to spend more money on the city’s teachers could wane. The budget for schools does not only depend on the city (state and federal funds also contribute to it) but debt within Chicago Public Schools has become huge: according to Illinois Policy it has surpassed $8bn, a fourfold increase, in the past two decades. That is largely due to huge unfunded liabilities in the teachers' pension fund. It leaves the school system with a “junk” credit rating. The big debt in the school system is a headache for Ms Lightfoot—who has already told the teachers "there is no more money" to pay for higher salaries. “We’re united in a righteous fight” bellowed one speaker in Chicago this week. Many more clashes, righteous or not, are yet to come in the city.