WHY, THE commander of Thailand’s armed forces asked darkly, did Thanathorn Juangroongruangkit, the leader of an opposition party, meet Joshua Wong, a prominent democracy advocate from Hong Kong? The real answer is simple: Messrs Thanathorn and Wong were both attending The Economist’s Open Future Festival in Hong Kong—a gathering to debate liberalism. But Apirat Kongsompong, the army chief, saw a much more insidious purpose. On October 11th he gave a speech in which he accused Mr Thanathorn and his Future Forward party of conspiring with Mr Wong to stir up protests in Thailand akin to those in Hong Kong. In theory, Thailand’s army, having seized power in a coup in 2014, has returned to the barracks, after handing power back to politicians. But General Apirat apparently sees nothing inappropriate in railing against communists, student agitators and opposition MPs. Nor does Thailand’s deputy prime minister, who quickly piled in, hinting that Mr Thanathorn and his party should face consequences for the meeting. (Mr Thanathorn already has been suspended as an MP on a technicality and may face prison over a sedition charge.)  Mr Apirat is not the only general struggling to adjust to life in a democracy. Prayuth Chan-ocha, the former army chief who led the coup of 2014 and has served as prime minister since, commands only a tiny majority in the lower house of parliament after a clumsily rigged election in March. He has to push a budget through the chamber soon—a process that looks likely to be fraught. His vulnerability explains the authorities’ increasingly shrill railing against Mr Thanathorn. Meanwhile, China, presumably, is delighted. Earlier on October 11th its embassy in Bangkok had released a tetchy statement on Facebook. "Some Thai politicians have linked up with those wishing to separate Hong Kong from China in a supportive manner, which is a serious offence and irresponsible,” it declared. Some might see the apparent meeting of minds between the Thai and Chinese authorities as more alarming still.