NITS. IF THE word still foments dread among parents, rest assured that it was ever thus. In one of the best-loved works by Pieter de Hooch, painted around 1660, a small child kneels into a woman’s lap as she carefully, lovingly, delouses her hair. Known as “A Mother’s Duty” (pictured above), the scene reframes a messy, intimate chore—of the sort that seldom found its way into valued art before the 17th-century Golden Age of Dutch painting—as a sacred rite of domesticity. Light streams into the room in complex patterns. A dog gazes outwards, its back turned on the viewer. The war on children’s headlice has become a scene of almost religious devotion. De Hooch was arguably the first artist to sanctify these passing moments among the Dutch housewives and maidservants of a prosperous but unsettled time. He did domesticity so well that posterity has taken him, like his female subjects, very much for granted. Remarkably, an exhibition that has just opened in Delft, the city where he lived and worked throughout the 1650s, is his first solo outing in the Netherlands.  Its 30 paintings, borrowed from lenders as varied as Queen Elizabeth II and the National Gallery of Art in Washington, DC, occupy two chambers in the Prinsenhof, a medieval convent that became a royal residence. Not far away is the mansion that housed the painters’ guild of St Luke. Here De Hooch would have met his younger contemporary Johannes Vermeer: the colleague whose fame eclipsed his only when the taste of connoisseurs changed in the late 19th century. At the Prinsenhof, the self-effacing De Hooch, a bricklayer’s son from Rotterdam who disappears from all documents after 1679, steps back into the limelight. The world that comes into focus feels less cosily bourgeois than his reputation would suggest. His ideal Dutch homes turn out to be muted battlegrounds in which headlice might prove the least dangerous of foes. Art critics often consider domestic paintings from the Golden Age to be a theatre of moral choice, where exemplary virtues and vices are pictured among drinkers, smokers, serving-girls, matrons and unruly children. De Hooch’s early works, “Guardroom” scenes of carousing officers tempted by gambling, drinking and whoring, do belong in this moralising mould. As Simon Schama, a historian, put it in his book about the period, he depicts a society coming to terms with “the embarrassment of riches”. In his women’s world of Delft, in the corners and shadows of those inner courtyards, a more subtle sort of test unfolds. Naturally, there is the long war against filth, and the policing of the home’s thresholds against contamination from outside. In De Hooch’s “Courtyard of a House in Delft”, long a favourite among visitors to the National Gallery in London, a broom falls symbolically across the foreground’s tiled floor. With the landmark spires of Delft’s churches in the background, “A Woman and Child in a Bleaching Ground” (pictured below) shows that, in the 17th century, you could and should wash your dirty linen in public as a signal of inner as well as outer purity. This, though, is one of those mysterious paintings that complicate De Hooch and his art. For a start, as Wim Weve, another historian, has proved, there never was a bleaching-ground (an area for cloth to be dried in the sun) on that specific spot. De Hooch’s cityscapes look utterly authentic, but he moves monuments and views around for dramatic effect. The bleacher’s small daughter, with her toy horse, looks on sceptically at this laundry ritual: many of the mischievously watching little girls, and boys, seem unconvinced by the fate of routine laid out for them. Behind, a mystery man approaches down an alley. Through another doorway—one of De Hooch’s alluring exits from the confined space of home and housework—a couple may be involved in some kind of romantic (or commercial) tryst. The hint of a promise or a threat—of escape, pleasure or rebellion—regularly appears in these episodes of rule-bound everyday life. Look at the sun-dappled scene of a “Woman with a Basket of Beans in a Kitchen Garden”. What could be more idyllic, more peaceful, more charming: a pageant of hard work rewarded while the summer produce ripens for the table? Then notice the man who approaches the bean-harvester, as yet unseen by her: a longed-for gentleman caller, or a looming menace? Meanwhile, in the foreground, a demonic smirking figure features on a decorated shutter. The longer the viewer looks at De Hooch’s scenes, the more their secret-packed stories seem to branch and turn. Other plots twist beneath the headline news of housewifely duty and home-making pride. The basket of clean linen in his “Man Reading a Letter to a Woman”—a match for the most celebrated Vermeers—has ceased to matter to the red-jacketed heroine; another story, one the viewer will never know, has transported her far from the daily war on stains. The exhibition promises to bring De Hooch “out of Vermeer’s shadow”, but his luminous works cast plenty of intriguing and perplexing shadows of their own. “Pieter de Hooch in Delft: From the Shadow of Vermeer” continues at the Museum Prinsenhof Delft until February 16th 2020