IT HAS BEEN three decades since she sauntered down the yellow brick road with the Scarecrow, the Tin Man and the Cowardly Lion. As “Judy”, a new biopic of Judy Garland, opens, its subject (played by Renée Zellweger) is 47 years old, broke, homeless and on the verge of losing custody of her two children. When she finds herself at a swanky party in Los Angeles, surrounded by hippies in their 20s, she is ill at ease. That is, until a young and handsome man approaches her with a cocktail. “We can’t have the world’s greatest entertainer out here without a drink,” he says. “Frank Sinatra’s here?” she quips. Difficult though Garland’s circumstances are, her ability to win over an audience and deliver a bon mot is unhampered. She is still a star. “Judy” differs from most biopics in that it focuses on a small time period rather than offering a sweeping panorama of the heroine’s career. Adapted from “End of the Rainbow”, a stage play by Peter Quilter, the film homes in on a limited run of performances Garland undertook at Talk of the Town, a famous cabaret club in London’s West End, in 1969. For such a seasoned entertainer, it should have been a simple gig and easy cash, but the task threatens to overwhelm her. Burdened by loneliness and feelings of low self-worth, Garland deals with her pain by drinking to excess and taking pills. She tries to play the role of a star—both onstage and off—but she seems always on the verge of exhaustion. When she is able to make it out in front of a crowd it feels like a triumph.  This fragility is explained by examining her past. In occasional flashbacks, “Judy” shows Garland’s mistreatment at the hands of Louis B. Mayer, an executive of Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer studios, to which Garland was signed for 15 years. As a naïve teenager, she is subjected to the mistreatment Hollywood saves for those young and female. She is forbidden from taking a lunch hour, despite it being guaranteed in her contract. Her diet is constantly scrutinised and food withheld from her; her managers force her to take amphetamines to curb her appetite and barbiturates to help her sleep. When she works up the nerve to complain, Mayer threatens her with expulsion from show business, instilling a fear of failure that still paralyses her as an adult. At a time when the treatment of women in Hollywood is under scrutiny, all this is an effective reminder that the cruelties of show business are not a recent phenomenon so much as a founding principle. Mayer coerces, bullies and manhandles Garland. Rupert Goold, the director, portrays Mayer almost as a monster, emphasising his enormity—especially when compared with the diminutive Garland—and half-hiding him in shadows. Ms Zellweger, whose casting was met with some scepticism, is in fact an inspirational choice for the role. Like Garland, she was a young star who struggled to find meaningful parts after years of ingénue roles, and whose appearance has been the subject of intense scrutiny and gossip. Ms Zellweger goes beyond mere impersonation to create a complex performance. She does not have the powerhouse singing voice, casually perfect dance steps and doe-eyed stare but then, at that point in her life, neither did Garland. “Judy” explores the difficulties of making a comeback, and Ms Zellweger’s sensitive performance deserves to gain recognition from the Academy. Unfortunately, despite its novel approach, “Judy” falls into the same traps as other biographical films. It reveres its subject too much. The cast of subordinates who flit in and out of her life—her handlers, her ex-husbands and her fans—are written not as fully-formed human beings but as reflections of the Garland mystique. In one particularly contrived scene, Garland spends a quiet evening at the apartment of a gay couple who call themselves her biggest fans. Over late-night cocktails, they share their sad stories. It could have been a meaningful moment of connection, but, with the couple given no defining characteristics outside of their sexual identity, it comes off more as a dutiful tip of the cap to Garland’s queer fans than anything resembling drama. Yet for many viewers, that will not matter. “Judy” tells the story of one of Hollywood’s most celebrated stars, and draws attention to the consequences of the industry’s abuse of women. It is a tale with a tragic ending: months after her stint at Talk of the Town, Garland died from an accidental overdose of sleeping pills. “Judy” is screening in America now and in Britain from October 2nd