OUR SPECIAL REPORT on India this week argues that Narendra Modi’s government has failed to acknowledge dangers looming over the economy. The GDP growth rate has slid to 5%; that may not sound bad, but demographic pressures mean that India’s economy must expand by 7.5% a year just to keep unemployment in check. To start putting things right, Mr Modi needs to appoint an economic team based on competence rather than affinity for the Hindu-nationalist ideology of his Bharatiya Janata Party.  Nevertheless, Mr Modi may take pride in the World Bank’s latest report on the ease of doing business around the world. India has risen to 63rd place, from 142nd when he took office in 2014. He is aiming for the top 50. China (31st) is already there. Saudi Arabia and Togo are this year’s biggest climbers. But because the report ignores infrastructure, skills and other things, it is not really a summary measure of the ease of doing business, but of the cost of complying with formal regulations. In Lebanon, corruption is rife and the economy stagnant. More than 1m of its 5m people are estimated to have taken to the streets in protest, demanding the prime minister’s resignation. Anger has been building for decades, but a proposed tax on calls made via WhatsApp was the spark. Many Lebanese rely on WhatsApp because the state telecoms service is notoriously pricey. Local calls cost 20 times more than in Egypt. In Canada’s general election on Monday, the Liberal Party, led by Justin Trudeau, lost its parliamentary majority. Mr Trudeau’s halo had slipped: he had pressed his attorney-general to intervene in a bribery prosecution, and during the campaign photos were published of him in brown- and blackface as a young man. The likeliest partner for his new minority government is the left-wing New Democratic Party. His weaker position and Canada’s political divisions (eg, over environmental policy) will make his second term harder than his first. Until recently science has been dominated by males. That bias is reflected not just among practitioners but in animal specimens, too. Researchers at the Natural History Museum in London have analysed almost 2.5m specimens in their own collection and those of four other leading museums. They found that (where the sex was described) 60% of the birds and 52% of the mammals were male. Males’ showier looks and larger size makes them the more valuable catch; their greater aggression and curiosity may also make them more vulnerable to being nabbed.