GAYS AND LESBIANS have won a string of narrow victories at the Supreme Court. Anti-sodomy laws were ruled unconstitutional in 2003. A law barring federal recognition of same-sex nuptials was axed a decade later, and in 2015 the court said same-sex couples nationwide have a constitutional right to wed. These cases were decided 5-4 or 6-3 over angry dissents and with Justice Anthony Kennedy joining his more liberal colleagues. That gay-rights-friendly coalition is no more. With the more conservative Justice Brett Kavanaugh robed for the first LGBT cases the court has heard since Justice Kennedy’s retirement, it would seem the plaintiffs face long odds. But the questions in the three employment-discrimination cases heard on October 8th—two focused on gay men, one on a transgender woman—differ markedly from earlier battles. They involve Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, not constitutional rights, and ask whether the bar on discrimination “because of sex” protects workers who face mistreatment on the basis of their sexual orientation or gender identity.  First up were the cases of Donald Zarda and Gerald Bostock, gay men who say their sexual orientation cost them their jobs. Pamela Karlan, their lawyer, told the justices there is “no analytic difference” between firing someone for being gay and sacking “men who are effeminate rather than macho”. Both punish “non-conformity with an expectation about how men should behave”. When pushed by Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg to explain why the Supreme Court should recognise “forms of sex discrimination that were not in Congress's contemplation in 1964” when the law was written, Ms Karlan observed that although the 1960s were the era of “Mad Men” sexism, the Supreme Court nevertheless found, in 1989, that discrimination against a woman who “cursed like a sailor, walked like a man and didn't wear makeup was reachable under Title VII”. Broadening the civil-rights umbrella further could invite unintended consequences, Justice Neil Gorsuch suggested. Sex-specific bathrooms and workplace dress codes might be “innocuous” for most employees, but what if the “affected communities” consider them harmful? Not to worry, Ms Karlan said. An “idiosyncratic preference does not void an otherwise valid dress code or bathroom rule”. And anyway, “it is hard to see how requiring men to use a men's room and women to use a women's room denies them employment opportunities”. More push-back came from Justice Samuel Alito. The scope of sex discrimination is “a big policy issue”, he said, and if the court re-writes Title VII to satisfy the plaintiffs, “we will be acting exactly like a legislature”. This concern animated the second case involving Aimee (née Anthony) Stephens, a transgender funeral director who was fired after telling her boss she would begin presenting herself as a woman while at work. Justice Gorsuch, who professes a fealty to the meaning of a statute’s words—rather than to its drafters’ intentions—told David Cole, lawyer for Ms Stephens, that the case is “close” and “I'm with you on the textual evidence”. But “at the end of the day”, he fretted, shouldn’t judges consider “the massive social upheaval that would be entailed in such a decision”? Maybe expanding Title VII belongs strictly in the legislature’s ken, he added. “It’s a question of judicial modesty.” In a rejoinder, Mr Cole pointed out that lower courts have been protecting transgender people “for 20 years” and “there’s been no upheaval”. And his syllogistic closing offered a path for the justices to side with his client without deigning to “update” Title VII from the bench: Firing “a man because he [is] a man” is sex discrimination, as is firing an employee because he is “insufficiently masculine”. So the boss firing Aimee Stephens “because he thought she is a man who is insufficiently masculine...must be sex discrimination”, too. Only Justice Alito—who raised the spectre of transgender women clamouring to compete on women’s sports teams under Title IX of the Civil Rights Act—seemed to be a sure vote against the LGBT employees’ claims. Chief Justice John Roberts asked searching questions of both sides. Justice Clarence Thomas was silent; Justice Kavanaugh asked only one question. The court’s liberals were less cagey: all four made clear that gay and trans people should enjoy federal protection at work. Two situated Title VII in the broader context of the Civil Rights Movement. The spirit of the age, Justice Stephen Breyer said, was protecting “people who were suffering terrible discrimination”. LGBT Americans are “still being beaten” and are still being ostracised”, Justice Sonia Sotomayor added. “At what point do we say we have to step in?” The outcome may hinge on Justice Gorsuch, who portrayed himself as caught between a commitment to textualism and an aversion to judicial intervention in legislative matters. But as Noel Francisco, the solicitor general, was wrapping up his argument in favour of the employers’ right to discriminate, he turned to look directly at Justice Gorsuch. The issue is “better left to Congress than the courts”, Mr Francisco said. Justice Gorsuch nodded along.